
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Bolivia Cover
How to Use this Guide
Bolivia Map
PLAN YOUR TRIP
ON THE ROAD
UNDERSTAND BOLIVIA
SURVIVAL GUIDE
Behind the Scenes
Icon Legend
Our Writers



GETTING THE MOST OUT OF LONELY
PLANET MAPS
E-reader devices vary in their ability to show our maps. To get the most out of the maps in this
guide, use the zoom function on your device. Or, visit http://media.lonelyplanet.com/ebookmaps
and grab a PDF download or print out all the maps in this guide.
Plan Your Trip
Welcome to Bolivia
Top Experiences
Need to Know
If You Like...
Month by Month
Itineraries
Bolivia Outdoors
Regions at a Glance
Top of section
Rough around the edges, superlative in its natural
beauty, rugged, vexing, complex and slightly nerveracking, Bolivia is one of South America’s most
diverse and perplexing nations.
Laguna Colorada ( Click here ), Los Lípez
FABIAN/GETTY IMAGES ©
welcome to
Bolivia
Adventure
Every second of every day is an adventure in Bolivia. Just finding your way
from summit to city can be a challenge in itself. Then there are the peaks, the
rivers, the treks, the jungles, the gut-bursting mountain-bike descents, and
the vast, impenetrable and remote expanses that tug you ever further into the
wild. It’s a place that calls for a boldness and braveness of spirit, the kind of
drive that took early explorers to the next rise on the horizon and the next
turn on the river. For climbers, the steep mountain peaks offer a lifetime’s
worth of adventure. Plunging from the Andes down to the edge of the
Amazon, multiday journeys follow ancient Inca paving, making this one of
the world’s top trekking destinations, while trips along rivers deep in the
heart of the Amazon take you past the riotous barks of monkeys and a
thriving mass of biodiversity that will leave you awestruck.
Culture
The cultural, historical and spiritual depths and richness of Latin America’s
most indigenous nation are astounding. Officially declared a Plurinational
State, Bolivia is a place to visit, learn from and experience a diverse mix of
peoples. There are at-risk cultures and languages that could disappear within
our lifetime, and traditions and beliefs that reach back to the days of the Inca
kings and Tiwanaku cosmologist priests. There are pastoralists and
independent miners in the highlands whose marked pride in Quechua,
Aymará and Uru roots is displayed in their ongoing patchwork of cultural
traditions. In the forested depths and low-lying plains, you’ll find a laid-back
attitude in remote Guaraní communities which are slowly changing and
adapting with the arrival of Quechua-speaking and mestizo settlers. In the
cities, culture can change quickly – or purposefully slowly – as you move
through a remarkably stratified society that includes both rich and poor,
educated and underprivileged. At every corner a new snapshot, a new
understanding will disrupt every stereotype, paradigm and truism you ever
had.
Nature
Bolivia is a wild place and nature lovers, aesthetes and poets alike will find
landscapes, views, and nature-born experiences not seen in many other
places on the planet. The sheer amount of geographic, topographic, climatic
and biological diversity will astound you. Then there are the playful bands of
monkeys, the elegant and reclusive herds of vicuña and more than 1000
unique bird species to entertain, inspire and elevate you to a new proximity
to the natural world.
Aymará people on Isla del Sol ( Click here ), Lake Titicaca
DAVID SANGER/GETTY IMAGES ©
Top of section
1
Salar de Uyuni
Who knew feeling this cold could feel so good? While a three- to fourday jeep tour through the world’s largest salt flat ( Click here ) will
leave your bones chattering, it could quite possibly be the defining
experience of your Bolivian adventure. The vastness, austerity and
crystalline perfection of the salt flat will inspire you. An early morning
exploration of rock gardens, geyser fields and piping hot springs along with
the camaraderie of three days on the road with your fellow ‘Salterians’ will
create a lasting memory.
TOP
experiences
MGTHERIN WEISE/GETTY IMAGES ©
2
Trekking in the Cordillera Real
Walk in the path of the Inca along the many trekking routes that weave
their way from the Andes into the Amazon Basin, through the
remarkable skyward-bound wilderness of the Cordillera Real ( Click here ).
These four- to 14-day treks are no small undertaking, but it will be worth
every step, every drop of sweat and every blister. Along the way, you’ll have
the chance to dine with indigenous families, cool off beside cascading
waterfalls and connect with Pachamama (Mother Earth) deep within her
potent green realm.
CUAN HANSEN/GETTY IMAGES ©
3
Tiwanaku
Bolivia’s hallmark archaeological site ( Click here ) sets your
imagination on fire. Despite lacking the power and prestige of other
ruins in Latin America – those who have visited Machu Picchu or Tikal will
be hard-pressed not to strike comparisons – this pre-Inca site has a lot to
offer. A massive celebration is held on the winter solstice, with smaller ones
taking place for the other solstice and equinoxes. The on-site museum
provides a thought-provoking glimpse into life in this religious and
astronomical center. An easy day trip from La Paz, Tiwanaku is a good place
to start your Andean odyssey.
HAMILTON WRIGHT/GETTY IMAGES ©
4
Parque Nacional & Área de Uso
Múltiple Amboró
Sandwiched between the old and new roads to Cochabamba is one of
Bolivia’s most biodiverse, and fortunately most accessible, protected
areas – the breathtaking Parque Nacional Amboró ( Click here ). Here the
lush, leafy Amazon kisses the thorny, dusty Chaco, and the sweaty lowlands
greet the refreshing highlands. Stunning scenery, wonderful wildlife and the
assistance of professional tour agencies make this a wilderness just begging
to be explored.
Red howler monkeys
REBECCA YALE/GETTY IMAGES ©
5
Isla del Sol, Lake Titicaca
Plopped onto sprawling Lake Titicaca like the cherry on top of an icecream sundae, Isla del Sol ( Click here ) is considered to be the
birthplace of Andean civilization. You can easily spend four days here,
tracking down forgotten Inca roads to small arch- aeological sites, removed
coves and intact indigenous communities. At the end of the day, take in the
sunset with a cerveza (beer) from your ridge-top lodge. The lake itself has a
magnetism, power and energy unique in this world – no wonder many claim
the ancient civilization of Atlantis was found here.
ANDRAS JANCSIK/GETTY IMAGES ©
6
Jesuit Missions Circuit
Though traveling around the missions circuit ( Click here ) is a
challenge in itself, the fantastically ornate reconstructions of Jesuit
churches that are the centerpieces of the villages along the route make it well
worth the effort. Lovingly restored by professional artisans and historians to
offer a glimpse of their former glory, the churches of the missions circuit are
testimony to the efforts of the missionaries who, against all odds, managed
to establish communities in remote Chiquitania before being expelled from
the Spanish colonies in 1767.
Art at San Javier
DANITA DELIMONT/GETTY IMAGES ©
7
Sucre
Glistening in the Andean sun, the white city of Sucre ( Click here ) is
the birthplace of the nation and a must-see for any visitor to Bolivia.
It’s an eclectic mix of the old and the new, where you can while away your
days perusing historic buildings and mu- seums, and spend your nights
enjoying the city’s famous nightlife. Visitors to Sucre invariably fall in love
with the place.
Convento de San Felipe Neri ( Click here )
JOHN ELK/GETTY IMAGES ©
8
La Paz Markets
The whirling engine that feeds and fuels a nation, the markets of La
Paz ( Click here ) are so crazy, so disjointed, so colorful and mad and
remarkable that you’ll end up spending at least a few afternoons wandering
from stall to stall. There are sections for food, sections for sorcery, sections
where you can buy back your stolen camera, sections for pipes and
Styrofoam – in every shape and form imaginable – and sections packed
with fruits, flowers and smelly fish that will push you to olfactory overload.
BRENT WINEBRENNER/GETTY IMAGES ©
9
Samaipata
Cosmopolitan Samaipata ( Click here ) manages to retain the air of a
relaxing mountain village, despite becoming an increasingly
unmissable stop on the Bolivian tourist trail. But it’s not just the great-value
accommodations and top-class restaurants that bring in the visitors.
Samaipata’s proximity to the mystical El Fuerte ruins and a series of worthy
day trips to nearby areas of outstanding natural beauty mean that many
visitors find themselves staying for a lot longer than they planned.
El Fuerte
JOSE ENRIQUE MOLINA/GETTY IMAGES ©
10
Potosí
Said to be the highest city in the world, lofty Potosí ( Click here ) once
sat upon a land laden with silver that funded the Spanish empire for
centuries. Though the mines now lay all but barren and the city has long
been in economic decline, the remnants of the wealthy past can still be seen
through the cracked brickwork of the ornate colonial-era buildings and
wonderfully preserved churches. Potosí’s most famous museum, the Casa de
la Moneda, was once Bolivia’s national mint and offers a fascinating insight
into the rise and fall of a city that once described itself as ‘the envy of
kings.’
JUERGEN RITTERBACH/GETTY IMAGES ©
11
Wine-Tasting near Tarija
Take a deep breath of the thin mountain air and prepare to get dizzy
sampling wine from the world’s highest vineyards ( Click here ). Though
rarely sold outside Bolivia, Tarija wines, produced in a Mediterranean-like
climate at altitudes of up to 2400m, are sold throughout Bolivia and have
received international plaudits for their fresh, aromatic taste. Whether you
prefer tinto (red), rosado (rosé) or blanco (white), you are likely to be
pleasantly surprised by the quality on offer and may find yourself taking a
bottle or two home for your friends.
El Valle de la Concepción ( Click here )
PETER LANGER/CORBIS ©
12
Tupiza
Cut from the pages of a Wild West novel, the canyon country around
Tupiza ( Click here ) is an awesome place for heading off into the sunset (in
a saddle, atop a mountain bike, on foot or in a 4WD). From town you can
ramble out into the poly- chromatic desert wonderlands and canyons,
visiting hard-cut mining villages and the town where Butch Cassidy and the
Sundance Kid met their end. The pleasant weather and lyrical feel of the
town make it a welcome retreat after a bit of hardship in the highlands.
IDEALINK PHOTOGRAPHY/ALAMY ©
Top of section
CURRENCY
»Boliviano (B$)
LANGUAGES
»Spanish, Quechua and Aymará
MONEY
»Cash is king, dollars are better than euros, but watch for counterfeits.
ATMs and credit cards are accepted in big cities. Small towns have cash
advances.
VISAS
»Generally free for visits up to 90 days. US citizens need to pay.
CELL PHONES
»Local SIM cards work on most modern phones. Roaming rates are
high. Data rates are even higher.
TRANSPORTATION
»Harrowing bus rides, some trains in the Altiplano, boats on the rivers
of the Amazon. Beware bogus taxis.
need to know
When to Go
HIGH SEASON (MAY–OCT)
»Expect mostly sunny days, but it’s cooler in the Altiplano.
»Reliable weather makes for easier transit, and better climbing, trekking
and mountain biking.
»Prices are generally higher. August is the most popular month.
SHOULDER SEASON
»August to October is a great time to visit the Salar de Uyuni.
»This is a good period for budget hunters.
LOW SEASON (NOV–APR)
»The rainy season; it can be miserable in the lowlands.
»Overland transport- ation is hard or impos- sible in some areas.
»Climbing is danger- ous, trekking and biking tedious. Febru- ary to April
have lots of religious festivals.
Your Daily Budget
BUDGET LESS THAN B$175
»Dorm/budget beds: B$30-50
»Set lunch and supplies bought from the market
»Museum entrances, limited guided trips
»Second-class transit
MIDRANGE B$175-630
»Hotel: B$160-400
»Continental breakfast in hotel, set lunch and dinner out
»Extra cash for beers, guided trips and tours
»First-class transit
TOP END OVER B$630
»Hotel: over B$400
»Breakfast buffet, lunch and dinner at high-end eatery
»Plenty of extra cash for guided trips
»First-class transit and occasional air transfers
Websites
»Bolivian Express (www.bolivianexpress.org) English magazine focusing
on cultural coverage.
»Bolivia Online (www.bolivia-online.net) Solid portal in English, Spanish
and German.
»Bolivia Web (www.boliviaweb.com) Good portal with a variety of
cultural and artistic links.
»Bolivia Weekly (www.boliviaweekly.com) Weekly news in English.
»Lonely Planet (www.lonelyplanet.com/Bolivia) Destination info, hotel
bookings, traveler forum etc.
Exchange Rates
Australia A$1 B$7.24
Canada C$1 B$6.99
Europe €1 B$8.92
Japan ¥10 B$0.84
New Zealand NZ$1 B$5.76
UK £1 B$11.07
US US$1 B$6.91
For current exchange rates, see www.xe.com.
Important Numbers
Country code 591
International access code 00
Ambulance 118
Fire 119
Operator 104
Arriving in Bolivia
»El Alto International Airport, La Paz
It’s very high (4050m).
Taxi is B$50 (US$7) to the airport from the city center. Minibuses are B$6
(US$1) during the day.
»Viru-Viru International Airport, Santa Cruz
Buses are the way to go. Taxi is B$70 (US$10) to the airport from the city
center. Minibuses are B$3 (US$0.50) during the day.
Don’t Leave Home Without
Bolivia is a tough travel destination. Specific travel warnings are included within the chapters.
Make sure you are prepared before your trip by checking the visa situation and travel advisories,
and packing the following:
»Proof of vaccination for yellow fever; first aid kit and bug spray
»Copy of your passport and of your travel insurance policy
»Plug adapter for your camera battery charger
»Binoculars for wildlife watching, plus an all-purpose knife or tool and
a headlamp
»A little extra cash to pay for emergencies or once-in-a-lifetime trips
»Sunscreen and a hat for high altitudes; warm clothes and a rain jacket
year-round
»Ear plugs for disco nights you want to sleep through and a pack lock or
other luggage security for peace of mind
»Sense of humor – your patience and courage will be tested in queues
and on buses
Top of section
Adventure Sports
You’re in luck. This Andean nation has kick-ass mountain biking, lost
summits that have only seen a handful of ascents, ‘easy’ 6000m climbs for
beginners, and plenty of opportunities for white-water rafting, plus
adrenaline-charged activ- ities such as paragliding, ziplining, rappelling and
rock climbing.
Climbing Step into this mountaineer’s dreamland with steep, glaciated
peaks that see little traffic ( Click here )
Mountain biking With elevation drops of 4000m, Bolivia offers some of the
best mountain-bike descents in the world – we suggest you take a bus back
up ( Click here )
Paragliding While it can be hard to find a qualified guide, para- gliding in
the Cordillera Real and Central Highlands is as good as it gets ( Click here )
Boating Whether you take a flat-water Amazon cruise or power your way
through white-water rock gardens, there’s plenty to get you on the water (
Click here )
Festivals
Bolivia shines during the myriad Catholic and folk festivals. It seems there’s
something happening nearly every month. The unique costumes, traditions,
dances, music and lore take you to another time.
if you like...
Carnaval It’s celebrated throughout the country, but Oruro’s festivities,
costumes and giant water fight are not to be missed ( Click here )
Fiesta de la Cruz Tarija comes to life with the Festival of the Cross, while
in the countryside tinku (ritual fighting) prevails ( Click here )
Fiesta de la Virgen de Cande- laria Pilgrims descend on Copacabana for
three days of drunken revelry and to honor the town’s patron saint ( Click
here )
Phujllay For a look at Bolivia’s Inca roots, check out this two-day
celebration that includes a Quechua mass and feast ( Click here )
Willkakuti On the winter solstice Bolivians celebrate Aymará New Year
with offerings at Tiwanaku ( Click here )
Fiesta del Santo Patrono de Moxos The Amazon’s biggest bash includes
fireworks, masses, dancing, feasts and wild costumes ( Click here )
Cultural Exploration
Extraordinary cultural experiences are to be had across Bolivia. The
culturally curious will love learning about the nation’s unique indigenous
imprint, history and modern-day trends by exploring archaeological sites,
well-preserved colonial cities, markets and mystical cathedrals and missions.
Sucre Bolivia’s white city remains an intellectual stronghold, home to some
of the nation’s best museums and architecture ( Click here )
Potosí This colonial city fueled Bolivia’s economy for hundreds of years –
the city center is not to be missed ( Click here )
Tiwanaku Bolivia’s best-known pre-Inca site has large ceremonial
platforms, monoliths and a mysterious arch that may have been an ancient
calendar ( Click here )
Markets Culture lives on every day in La Paz’ markets, where Quechua,
Aymará, Spanish, English and German are heard on nearly every corner (
Click here )
Jesuit Missions Circuit There’s a mystical air to the missions of the
Chiquitania region outside Santa Cruz ( Click here )
Tarija Indulge your senses in Bolivia’s wine country ( Click here )
Offerings for Pachamama (Mother Earth), Sucre ( Click here )
ESCUDERO PATRICK/GETTY IMAGES ©
Wildlife Watching
Nature is everywhere, making Bolivia a hands-down favorite for nature
lovers, bird-watchers and anyone curious about wildlife. Large national
parks and nature preserves protect (to a degree) the country’s endemic and
at-risk species. There’s a remarkable variety at your doorstep. And with
amazingly varied geography (high plains, deserts, mountains, forests,
grasslands, jungle) you can see a world’s worth of critters in a short time.
Parque Nacional Madidi The Amazon comes to you in Bolivia’s bestknown national park ( Click here )
Parque Nacional Tunari Easily accessed wilderness area just outside
Cochabamba ( Click here )
Parque Nacional Amboró This remote national park is home to rare
species, such as the spectacled bear, and is a bird-watcher’s paradise ( Click
here )
Parque Nacional Sajama The bleak landscape of Sajama is home to rhea,
vicuña and even some Andean wildcats ( Click here )
Parque Nacional Carrasco Explore the cloud forest and encounter a variety
of mammals and birds in this isolated national park ( Click here )
Trekking
For long-distance hauls and shorter day trips along ancient Inca paving,
down cloud-encased valleys and through vast swaths of untamed wilderness,
you can’t beat Bolivia’s treks. Many start in the Andes, finishing just above
the Amazon Basin, while others take you through lost forests, past remote
rural communities and into the heart of the Bolivian countryside.
El Choro Traversing Parque Nacional Cotopata, the Choro trek is the most
popular trip around ( Click here )
Takesi Memorable cultural experiences await in the remote rural villages
along this fun and easily accessible option ( Click here )
Yunga Cruz The most demanding of the Inca treks, this five- to six-day trip
takes you over the shoulder of Illimani down into the warm climes of the
Yungas ( Click here )
Cordillera de los Frailes Immerse yourself in Jalq’a culture on this fun
village-to-village trek outside Sucre ( Click here )
Mapiri Further off the beaten track, this six-day romp is for the hard core
only ( Click here )
Crafts
Take a little piece of Bolivia home from this treasure-trove of fine artisan
goods. There are intricate textiles, coca products, witches’ talismans, highquality silver products, baskets, scarves, shawls and more. Better yet, most
of the shopping is done in resplendent open-air markets, making for a unique
cultural and sensory experience.
Musical instruments This is a lyrical place, and La Paz’ Sagárnaga market
has great deals on instruments such as pifano (indigenous flute), charango
(ukulele-like instrument) and those famous pan pipes ( Click here )
Woven wear Cruise through the markets in nearly any Altiplano town for
fine woven scarves, sweaters and shawls made from alpaca, llama and
vicuña wool ( Click here )
Silver One of the country’s prime exports takes art form in the crafts shops
of Potosí ( Click here )
Ceramics The towns around Cochabamba, such as Huayculli, specialize in
ceramics, often with an Andean twist ( Click here )
Jalq’a weaving Head out from Sucre to visit remote Jalq’a villages and
explore some of the finest woven wall hangings around ( Click here )
Top of section
Top Events
Fiesta de la Virgen de Candelaria February
Carnaval February
Phujllay March
Gran Poder May
Fiesta del Santo Patrono de Moxos July
January
Although part of summer, this is the rainiest month of the year, making
getting around tough. Climbing is basically out of the question, but you
could rough it on hikes and other outdoor activities.
NEW YEAR’S EVE
Watch out for street vendors selling underwear leading up to January 1. Red
underwear will help your love life, yellow is for money and pink is for
health. With the chiming of the gongs at midnight, 12 grapes are choked
down for good luck and fake money is counted to signal the wealth that will
come in the new year.
DÍA DE LOS REYES MAGOS
‘Kings’ Day’ (Epiphany) is celebrated on January 6 as the day the three
wise kings visited the baby Jesus after his birth. The largest celebrations are
month by month
in Reyes (in the Beni region), Sucre, Tarija, and rural villages in the
departments of Oruro, Cochabamba and Potosí.
ALASITAS
Taking place in La Paz and Copacabana on January 24 and for two weeks
after, this giant fair celebrates Ekeko, the Aymará god of abundance, with
stalls and street vendors selling miniatures of items people are longing for
(tiny houses, cars, bank- notes etc).
February
This wet and warm month sees important celebrations for Pachamama
(Mother Earth), especially in traditional communities, with ceremonies
and rituals taking place in her honor.
FIESTA DE LA VIRGEN DE CANDELARIA
This week-long festival is held during the first week of February in Aiquile
(Cochabamba), Samaipata (Santa Cruz), Angostura (Tarija) and
Cha’llapampa (Oruro). The biggest cele- bration kicks off on February 2 in
Copacabana.
CARNAVAL
Celebrations are held nationwide the week before Lent. Oruro is known for
having the most colorful Carnaval fiesta; Santa Cruz, Sucre and Tarija
follow suit. Carnaval dates change each year, depending on when Lent falls,
so check your calendar.
March
The rain starts to taper off, making it slightly easier to get around. You
could consider heading out for a trek or mountain bike. River rafting is
getting good.
SEMANA SANTA
One of the most impressive of the nationwide Holy Week activities is the
Good Friday fiesta in Copa- cabana, when hundreds of pilgrims arrive on
foot from La Paz. It’s a fun time across the country.
PHUJLLAY
On the second Sunday in March, indigenous people gather in Tarabuco to
celebrate the 1816 victory of local armies over Spanish troops with ritual
dancing, song, music and chicha (fermented corn) drinking.
May
Winter is here! It’s starting to cool off. The weather is nice in the
lowlands, but transit can still be a mess. The rains are nearly gone, and
trekking, climbing and mountain-biking season begins.
FIESTA DE LA CRUZ
The Festival of the Cross (May 3) brings revelry to Tarija for two weeks.
The fiesta is also big in Valle- grande (Santa Cruz), Cocha- bamba and
Copacabana. Tinku (ritual fighting) takes place in rural communities around
Potosí.
GRAN PODER
Held in late May/early June, this La Paz festival involves candle
processions, elaborate costumes and dancing.
June
It’s getting a little too cold for comfort in the Altiplano, but the rains
are basically gone. Transportation in the lowlands should be getting
easier and temperatures are cooling off.
WILLKAKUTI
On June 21, the Aymará celebrate the winter solstice – the return of the new
sun – and their New Year. The biggest ceremony takes place overnight at
Tiwanaku.
SAN JUAN
This Christian holiday is held nationwide (June 24), with bonfires,
fireworks and traditional burning of wood. The largest celebrations take
place around Santa Cruz, with firewalkers in the village of Porongo.
July
High season is in full swing. It’s dry and cold in the Altiplano, cooler
and drier in the lowlands, and just nice in the areas in between.
FIESTA DEL SANTO PATRONO DE
MOXOS
Running from July 22 to the end of the month, this kick-ass festival is the
biggest in Beni. Expect outrageous costumes, plenty of drinking and some
hard partying.
August
This is the height of the tourist season. It’s starting to warm up a little
in the Altiplano, making it a good time for a trip to Salar de Uyuni.
Important religious and indigenous festivals also take place.
INDEPENDENCE DAY
This lively public holiday (August 6) sees lots of gunfire in the air and
parades galore. It’s celebrated every- where, but is especially boisterous in
Copacabana.
September
Some of the tourists head home, making this cool, dry time perfect to
pick up deals. Conditions for adventure sports continue to be excellent,
though expect a slight increase in rains.
FIESTA DE SAN ROQUE
One of Tarija’s biggest fiestas, San Roque celebrates the end of the plague
and leprosy in the area. It kicks off on August 16, but most of the
celebrations begin on the first Sunday of September, lasting eight days.
October
At the end of winter (and the high season), rainfall spikes in the
lowlands, while it’s still relatively tolerable in the Altiplano. Deals can
be had, but it’s getting tougher to climb, trek and generally be
outdoors. It will stay rainy until April.
Top of section
Whether you’ve got six days or 60, these itineraries
provide a starting point for the trip of a lifetime. Want
more inspiration? Head online to
lonelyplanet.com/thorntree to chat with other
travelers.
Two Weeks
Best of Bolivia
itineraries
This bare-bones itinerary will take you to the best of Bolivia at a headrattling pace. Start out with a day of acclimatization in La Paz visiting the
markets. History buffs can take a side trip to Tiwanaku. From La Paz, head
to Lake Titicaca. Allow up to three days on the lake to take in the sites of
Copacabana and Isla del Sol and continue your acclimatization. From there,
circle down the Altiplano (via La Paz) to the Salar de Uyuni for a bonechatteringly cold three-day jeep tour. You can extend your trip to take you to
the former territory of Butch Cassidy in the pleasant cowboy town of
Tupiza. Swing up to Potosí, a starkly beautiful Unesco World Heritage city,
situated at 4070m, where you can visit the mint and mines. After a day or
two, head to the white city of Sucre to hang out with students in grand
plazas. Return to La Paz via Cochabamba, taking in the good views along
the way. On your last day in La Paz, consider a day of museum-hopping or a
mountain-bike ride down the World’s Most Dangerous Road to Coroico.
Four to Five Weeks
The Whole Country
A month allows more time to acclimatize to the high altitude, take in one of
Bolivia’s signature treks, climb a peak, do a mountain-bike trip or simply
dive into Bolivian culture. From La Paz you can choose from a variety of
day trips, including a visit to Tiwanaku or hiking in nearby Chacaltaya or
Valle de la Luna. The adventurous can take on the Takesi or Choro treks, or
ride a bike (or bus) down the World’s Most Dangerous Road to Coroico in
the Yungas. Next, head north to Rurrenabaque and the famous Parque
Nacional Madidi – depending on your time and budget you can get here by
land, air or boat. Take the time to explore this wild, little-trodden utopia.
From ‘Rurre,’ you can puddle-jump or take a boat to some of the more
remote parks, such as the Reserva Biosférica del Beni, or simply head over
to Santa Cruz. From here you’ll kick off a multi-day road trip through the
Jesuit Missions Circuit, curling back via Santa Cruz to the unique ruins
near the cooler-than-thou village of Samaipata and the spectacular Parque
Nacional & Área de Uso Múltiple Amboró. Head back toward
Cochabamba for good market buys. From there you’ll start gaining some
altitude as you pass through the culturally charged towns of Sucre and
Potosí. After you’ve had your fill of these colonial masterpieces, cruise
down to wine country near Tarija for a few days of warm weather, wine and
chilled-to-perfection Zen. You can then loop across to Tupiza for a day or
two of mountain biking, while you arrange your four-day Salar de Uyuni
trip, going the back way to avoid the crowds. On the way back toward La
Paz, adventurous spirits may wish to stop near Curahuara de Carangas,
before heading on to the high-plains wonderland of Parque Nacional
Sajama, where hot springs and wildlife watching await. But you’re not done
yet: if you still have time, continue through La Paz to Copacabana for a day
or two of beachfront fun on Lake Titicaca. Cruise over on the ferry,
stopping at Isla de la Luna for an afternoon on your way to Isla del Sol. It’s
easy to spend five days here, trekking to lost valleys, ruins and small
indigenous villages.
Three to Four Weeks
Amazon
More than half of Bolivia’s territory lies in the Amazon, and yet this is one
of the least visited parts of the country. Sounds amazing! Waterway
adventures here are good (and wet) in the rainy season, but if you plan on
any type of road travel you should stick with the dry months. Start in Santa
Cruz, a sophisticated and cosmopolitan city with a dreamy (sometimes
steamy) climate and tropical atmosphere. From here fly or catch the
overnight bus to Trinidad, a sleepy town with a pretty plaza. With enough
time, the trip down the Río Mamoré from Trinidad to Guayaramerín is
highly recommended. If you don’t have the time, stay in town for a bit,
whirling around on a motorcycle for a local fish meal, a visit to a museum or
two and a much-needed siesta or three – it gets hot. A three-hour bus ride
will take you to the Jesuit mission village of San Ignacio de Moxos – plan
your trip around the town’s colorful, not-to-be-missed festival in July. From
here, wildlife watchers should make a detour from El Porvenir into Reserva
Biosférica del Beni, where the trained eye can spot up to 500 species of
birds. There are around 100 different mammals in the reserve, also home to
Chimane people. It’s a long slog from here via San Borja to
Rurrenabaque, hammock country, from where you can set out for a couple
of days on a jungle or pampas tour. One option is to get your jungle fill at the
San Miguel del Bala eco-resort, just upriver from Rurrenabaque. Whatever
you do, don’t miss a trip to Parque Nacional Madidi. Bolivia’s best-known
national park offers a week’s or a lifetime’s worth of adventures in more
than 1.8 million hectares. The park’s remarkable biodiversity is best enjoyed
at a slow pace, and you should leave enough time to stay at the highly
regarded, community-run Chalalán Ecolodge. An option into the Amazon
region from La Paz is via a hiking, boating and biking route from the Yungas
town of Sorata or on a rough ride through the remote Cordillera
Apolobamba.
Two Weeks
The Cordilleras & Yungas
Trapped between the heights of the Andes and the Amazon, this fascinating
area is a wonderland for trekkers, climbers, hikers and bikers. Getting here is
half the fun. Trekkers can start from outside La Paz, traveling by foot via
the Takesi or Choro treks into the heart of the Yungas. You can also get into
the southern Yungas on a butt-busting daylong mountain-bike ride down the
World’s Most Dangerous Road. Be sure to spend a few days at the end of
your descent in the pleasant Yungas villages of Coroico or Chulumani,
which offer plenty of day hikes, swimming and a chilled-out traveler vibe.
From there, it’s back to the capital (or via a tough circuitous jungle route) for
climbing and trekking in the Cordillera Real, stopping in the cool-air, softspirited Andean town of Sorata. Adventurers could take on any number of
treks from Sorata, good mountain-bike adventures or head up to the
glaciated peaks of the Cordillera. Then, if you have the time, you could
extend this trip to the seldom- explored Cordillera Apolobamba for visits
to lost tribes or wildcat miners and loads of deep wilderness trekking.
Otherwise, think about linking from Sorata by land or boat north into the
Amazon Basin.
Three Weeks
Southeast Bolivia
This trip will get you away from the main tourist track and into Bolivia’s
warm southern comforts. Along the way, there are a few trekking options,
interesting cultural centers and energetic cityscapes. Start with a few days of
partying in Santa Cruz, Bolivia’s second-largest city. It’s great fun just
wandering around the streets as you dive into camba (lowlands) culture.
Then make your way out of the city for a weeklong dusty adventure through
the Jesuit Missions Circuit, a series of beautiful mission villages where
baroque music and faith meld with the chilled-out culture of the Guaraní,
which is punctuated by contented smiles, simple connection with the land
and unique cultural experiences. Cruise back through Santa Cruz on your
way to the pre-Inca ruins at Samaipata and tip-top wildlife watching at the
Parque Nacional & Área de Uso Múltiple Amboró. From the park
(backtracking via Samaipata and Santa Cruz) make your way down to the
relaxed wine-country town of Tarija. After a few days in town, you can
customize the tail end of your adventure with hikes along the Inca Trail in
the Reserva Biológica Cordillera de Sama or in any of the numerous
national parks and reserves of the Chaco region.
Top of section
Best Treks
El Choro Two- or three-day classic trek
Takesi Bolivia’s Inca Trail passes small villages on a two-day journey.
Yunga Cruz A five- or six-day thigh buster with fewer crowds and
more adventure.
Cordillera de los Frailes Bring a guide on this off-the-beaten-track
hike.
Best Biking Trips
World’s Most Dangerous Road It’s a classic mountain-biking
adventure.
Zongo Valley Experts only at this downhill mecca.
Sorata Less traveled, with more single track.
La Paz Get steep near Chacaltaya and the Zona Sur.
Best Climbs
Huayna Potosí Good for beginners, but it’s no cake walk.
Illimani Experts will love this amazingly beautiful climb.
Cordillera Apolobamba Far from civilization, this is where adventure
begins.
Bolivia is like a theme park for grown-up adventurers. It offers multiday
treks, relatively easy day hikes, mountain biking that’ll leave your teeth
chattering, climbs to lost Andean peaks, rivers to raft, rugged 4WD trips to
bolivia outdoors
the corners of the old Inca empire, and just about anything else you could
ask for.
Dry season (May through October) makes for safer climbs, drier bike
trails and easier hikes. Plan to get wet the rest of the year.
HIKING & TREKKING
Hiking and trekking are arguably the most rewarding Andean activities.
Add a porter, llama train and experienced guide, and you have all the
makings for a grand adventure. Some of the most popular hikes and treks in
Bolivia begin near La Paz, traverse the Cordillera Real along ancient Inca
routes and end in the Yungas. These include the well-known and well-used
El Choro, Takesi and Yunga Cruz treks.
Sorata is a trekker’s dream come true, offering a variety of options from
don’t-leave-home-without-a-machete-type hikes such as the Mapiri Trail
to more pleasant walks on Inca trails surrounding the Illampu massif. The
Área Natural de Manejo Integrado Nacional (Anmin) Apolobamba,
which includes the four- to five-day Lagunillas to Agua Blanca trek, is
becoming more popular but is best visited with a guide. Be aware that the
treks near Sorata and in the Cordillera Apolobamba have largely fallen into
disuse, and there has been an increase in reports of robberies.
Bolivia’s national parks are also paradise for hikers, with hiking
opportunities in Parque Nacional & Área de Uso Múltiple Amboró and
Parque Nacional Saja- ma. A few hikes outside Charazani are also worth
checking out.
For a shorter jaunt, hire a guide and cruise the cultural and historic sites
and hot springs around Cordillera de los Frailes outside Sucre or El Nido
de los Condores near Samaipata.
Many treks can be done by experienced outdoors travelers without a
guide (you should know how to use a map, compass and GPS, build a fire –
even in the rain – and open a bottle of wine with a pocket knife). Nevertheless, hiring a guide provides an added level of security. No matter what,
check out the security situation before heading out. Solo female travelers
need to be extra careful.
Trekking in Bolivia by Yossi Brain is a good resource.
RESPONSIBLE TREKKING
To help preserve the ecology and beauty of Bolivia, consider the following tips when trekking.
»Carry out all your trash Yes, many tracks in Bolivia are already
littered, but this doesn’t mean that you should contribute to it.
»Never bury your rubbish Digging disturbs soil and ground cover,
encourages erosion, affects local wildlife and the rubbish may take
years to rot.
»Keep water sources clean Contamination of water sources by human
feces can lead to the transmission of all sorts of nasties. Where there is a
toilet, use it. Where there is none, best practice is to carry waste out. If
you decide to bury it, dig a deep hole away from water sources.
»Be clean, but not too clean Don’t use detergents or toothpaste in or
near watercourses.
»Stick to existing trails Avoid cutting corners – it contributes to
erosion.
»Don’t depend on open fires for cooking Cook on a lightweight
kerosene, alcohol or Shellite (white gas) stove and avoid those powered
by disposable butane gas canisters. Continuous cutting of wood by local
communities and trekkers can cause deforestation, plus wildfire risks.
»Do not feed the wildlife Don’t touch them either. It can lead to
animals becoming dependent on handouts, to unbalanced populations
and to disease.
»Always seek permission to camp Ask in the village if you can camp.
MOUNTAINEERING &
CLIMBING
Climbing in Bolivia is an exercise in extremes – like the country itself. In
the dry southern winter (May to October) temperatures may fluctuate as
much as 40.5°C in a single day. Once you’re acclimatized to the Altiplano’s
relatively thin air (you’ll need at least a week), there is still 2500m of even
thinner air above.
A plus for climbers is the access to mountains; although public
transportation may not always be available, roads pass within easy striking
distance of many fine peaks.
The most accessible and spectacular climbing in the country is along the
160km-long Cordillera Real northeast of La Paz. Six of its peaks rise
above 6000m and there are many more gems in the 5000m range. Because
of the altitude, glaciers and ice or steep snow, few of the peaks are ‘walkups,’ but some are within the capability of an average climber, and many
can be done by beginners with a competent guide. Huayna Potosí is one of
the most popular climbs for nonprofessionals, but be aware that although
it’s on the La Paz agency circuit, it’s no walk (or climb) in the park! La Paz
operators also take climbs up the magnificent Volcán Sajama, Bolivia’s
highest peak.
Around Cordillera Quimsa Cruz there is a variety of lesser-known
climbing opportunities. Volcán Illimani is for serious climbing expeditions
and popular among advanced climbing groups.
Staying Safe
Dangers include getting lost, avalanches, crevasses, snow blindness,
dehydration, altitude sickness, and occasional muggings on the way up. To
avoid these things be careful when hiring a guide, buy mountaineering
insurance, drink lots of water, protect your skin, dress properly and wear
sunglasses. Altitude sickness is a very real thing – watch for signs of
fatigue, dizziness and nausea. Proper acclimatization and hydration will
help. If you think you are getting sick, head down.
Socorro Andino Bolivia ( Click here ) provides rescue assistance for
around US$100 per day, per guide.
Hiring a Guide
Many travel agencies in La Paz and larger cities organize climbing and
trekking trips in the Cordillera Real and other areas. Not all, however, are
everything they claim to be. Some guides have gotten lost, several have
died, and others have practiced less-than-professional tactics, such as
stringing 10 or more climbers on the same rope. Always do your research
and go with professionally accredited guides such as those registered with
the Asociación de Guias de Montaña ( 2-214-7951; www.agmtb.org;
Sagárnaga 189, Edificio Doryan, La Paz), an internationally certified
association of registered mountain guides. They’re more expensive, but it’s
worth the cost.
When choosing an agency, ask to see the equipment you will be using
and meet the guide. If harnesses are worn, double-boots are broken down or
the ropes are frayed, demand they be replaced. Talk with the guide and
make sure you feel comfortable with them. When you hit the mountain, the
guide should teach you how to travel on a rope (two people and a guide per
rope, no more) and self-arrest with your ice ax.
Agencies can provide almost everything you will need – from just
organizing transportation to a full service with guide, cook, mules, porters,
an itinerary and so forth – but you should bring warm clothes (avoid cotton
and stick to wool or synthetics), a headlamp and extra batteries, plenty of
water and snacks. The guides will generally prepare three meals a day.
Professional trekking guides generally charge US$40 to US$60 per day
(plus food).
Maps
Historically, maps of Bolivia’s climbing areas have been poor in quality and
difficult to obtain. Even now, elevations of peaks are murky, with reported
altitudes varying as much as 600m – it seems the rumor that Ancohuma is
taller than Argentina’s Aconcagua won’t die.
Maps are available from Los Amigos del Libro, which has branches in
La Paz ( 22-220-4321; www.librosbolivia.com; Mercado 1315),
Cochabamba ( Click here ) and Santa Cruz ( 3-336-0709; Ingavi 114),
and other bookstores. In La Paz try the trekking agents and tourist shops
along Sagárnaga.
The Travel Map of Bolivia, one of the best country maps, and New Map
of the Cordi- llera Real, which shows mountains, roads and precolonial
routes, are published by O’Brien Cartographics. They are out of print, but
still available at various tourist hangouts, including the postcard kiosks
within La Paz’ central post office ( Click here ).
Government 1:50,000 topographical and specialty sheets are available
from the Ins- tituto Geográfico Militar (IGM), which has offices in most
major cities, including a branch in La Paz ( Click here ).
Walter Guzmán Córdova has produced 1:50,000 colorful contour maps of
El Choro–Takesi–Yunga Cruz, Mururata–Illimani, Huayna Potosí–
Condoriri and Sajama, but those other than the El Choro–Takesi–Yunga
Cruz map are in short supply. The Deutscher Alpenverein (German Alpine
Club) produces the excellent and accurate 1:50,000 maps Alpenvereinskarte
Cordillera Real Nord (Illampu), which includes the Sorata area, and
Alpenvereinskarte Cordillera Real Süd (Illimani), which centers on Illimani.
Guidebooks
The best mountaineering guide is Bolivia: A Climbing Guide by Yossi
Brain; the late author worked as a climbing guide in La Paz and served as
secretary of the Club Andino Boliviano. The Andes of Bolivia by Alain
Mesili was recently translated into English.
MOUNTAIN BIKING
Bolivia is blessed with some of the most dramatic mountain-biking terrain
in the world, and offers seven months a year of near-perfect weather and
relatively easy access to mountain ranges, magnificent lakes, precolonial
ruins and trails, and myriad eco-zones connected by an extensive network
of footpaths and jeep roads.
The Bolivian Andes are full of long and thrilling descents, as well as
challenging touring possibilities – but most people opt for downhill rides
because of the altitude. One of the world’s longest downhill rides will take
you from Parque Nacional Sajama down to the Chilean coast at Arica. In
the dry season you can even tackle the mostly level roads of the vast
Amazon lowlands.
Some rides from La Paz can be done by riders of any experience level.
There are more combinations than on a bike lock as trails lead through Inca
roads, tropical tracks, jeep roads and scree chutes. The best known (but not
necessarily the best for serious riders) is the thrilling 3600m trip down the
World’s Most Dangerous Road from La Cumbre to Coroico. Another
popular route near La Paz is the lush Zongo Valley ride, which can be
started from Chacaltaya (5395m).
The town of Sorata is emerging as the mountain-bike mecca of Bolivia,
with scores of downhill single-track trails and jeep road rides near town,
including a combination bike-and-boat trip from Sorata to Rurrenabaque.
For the hardcore rider, scree chutes to biker-built single track and jump
zones abound. Every year, typically in October, Sorata is host to the longest
downhill race on a hand-built course, the Jach’a Avalancha (Grand
Avalanche) Mountain Bike Race. Other epic descents begin in Sorata and
head into the hinterland of the Cordi- llera Muñecas, or start in Copacabana
and La Paz and head to Sorata.
More and more travelers are taking up the cycling challenge and heading
on two wheels from the north of the country to the south, or vice versa.
Those with their own bikes need to consider several factors. During part of
the rainy season, particularly December to February, some roads become
mired in muck and heavy rain can greatly reduce visibility, creating
dangerous conditions. Also worth noting is Bolivia’s lack of spare parts.
Comprehensive repair kits are essential. In the southern Altiplano and
Uyuni regions, water is very scarce; you must be able to carry at least two
days’ worth of water in some places.
4WD TOURS
Heading out in 4WD vehicles is becoming an increasingly popular activity.
It allows you access to places that are tricky to get to and, although
sometimes on the pricier side, may be the only feasible way of visiting a
region. As well as the standard Southwest Circuit tours (setting off from
Uyuni, Tupiza or La Paz), you can cruise out to the quebradas (ravines or
washes, usually dry) beyond Tupiza, visit the Tarabuco market on a tour
from Sucre or the Inca ruins near Cochabamba.
Tours in 4WDs are a great way to enter some of the country’s national
parks. Current trips include those around Parque Nacional Torotoro (from
Cochabamba) and Parque Nacional Sajama (from La Paz), or into the
Cordillera de los Frailes (from Sucre).
Those keen to arrange trips themselves should consider hiring a driver.
This can be an efficient and good-value way of seeing specific areas,
especially in a group.
WHITE-WATER RAFTING &
KAYAKING
One of Bolivia’s greatest secrets is the number of white-water rivers that
drain the eastern slopes of the Andes between the Cordillera Apolobamba
and the Chapare. Here, avid rafters and kayakers can enjoy thrilling
descents. While access will normally require long drives and/or treks – and
considerable expense if done independently – there are a few fine rivers that
are relatively accessible.
Some La Paz tour agencies can organize day trips on the Río Coroico.
Other options include the Río Unduavi and numerous wild Chapare rivers.
A more gentle but fun rush in the Chuquisaca region is a float downriver
in rubber inner-tubes. This trip is often coupled with mountain biking. One
of the greatest thrills along the same biathlon idea is to cruise 4000m
downhill on mountain bike to Mapiri and then raft your way for several
days, camping en route, to Rurrenabaque. Amazon canoe tours along the
Río Beni are unforgettable, as are the trips along the Río Mamoré from
Trinidad.
GO WITH THE FLOW
Numerous tour operators are combining rafting, biking, hiking and 4WD trips. These trips can
be costly, but it’s great fun to mix things up a bit.
»Sorata to Rurrenabaque A double-action trip comprising a five-day
ride-and-river jaunt. This full-on adventure includes a two-day biking
trip, which culminates in an exciting 4000m descent on single track via
Consata and Mapiri, followed by three days of floating down the Río
Beni on a riveting expedition in a motorized dugout canoe, with side
hikes to waterfalls and to Parque Nacional Madidi for wildlife watching.
It’s offered by Andean Epics ( Click here ).
»Coroico You can custom-build trips with guides from Coroico that
will take you to waterfalls by dawn, in an all-terrain vehicle (ATV) by
noon and to visit canyons by sunset.
»Tupiza Travel by horse, ATV and mountain bike on innovative
triathlons.
»Copacabana Paddle a swan boat across the bay, cycle to Yampupata,
row to Isla del Sol, run across the island, then take the boat back. It’s
never been done in one day (according to legend).
HORSEBACK RIDING
For some, a horse saddle sure beats a bus seat, and it’s a great way to absorb
the sights, sounds and smells of a country. Horseback-riding trips are a new,
increasingly popular way to reach otherwise inaccessible wilderness areas.
The best place to try it is in Tupiza, former territory of Butch Cassidy and
the Sundance Kid. You get to see the multicol-ored desert landscape,
quebradas and cacti-dotted countryside. Other pleasant options for
horseback riding are through cloud forest in Coroico, around La Paz – see
Calacoto Tours Offline map Google map ( 2-211-2524;
www.calacototours.com; cnr Murillo & Sagárnaga, La Paz) – and in the
cerrado (savanna) of the Reserva Biosférica del Beni.
WILDLIFE WATCHING
Flora and fauna fanatics are spoilt for choice in this extraordinary country
where world-class wildlife watching abounds. The divers- ity of intact
habitats throughout the country accounts for the huge number of surviving
species.
Parque Nacional Madidi, for example, home to more than 1000 bird
species as well as wildlife endemic to the majority of Bolivia’s ecosystems,
from tropical rainforest and savanna to cloud forest and alpine tundra, is
arguably one of the most biodiverse places on the planet. Agencies, often
run by scientists or environmentalists, run nature trips out of Santa Cruz,
Cochabamba and Samaipata and, to a lesser extent, from La Paz.
Bird-watching hot spots include the highlands around La Paz and
Cochabamba, Parque Nacional & Área de Uso Múltiple Amboró and the
Reserva Biosférica del Beni. Contact Asociación Armonía ( Click here ),
the Bolivian partner of BirdLife International, for further information. Other
organizations with bird knowledge include Fundación Amigos de la
Naturaleza ( Click here ) and Michael Blendinger Tours ( Click here ).
OTHER ACTIVITIES
»Paragliding is a recently introduced activity, so it should be done with
care – not all local guides are experts of years’ standing. Most paragliding
is done around Sucre.
»More relaxing hot spots are the many termas (hot springs) that bubble
away in various parts of the country. You don’t have to go to the ends of the
earth to immerse yourself in this less energetic activity – there are springs in
Tarapaya just outside Potosí, Talula, San Javier and Sajama.
»Ziplining and canopy tours are just starting up, with ziplines near
Coroico and ‘The Biggest Canopy in Bolivia’ near Rurrenabaque. Then
there’s fishing, canyoneering, driving ATVs (noise and pollution pots that
they are), and rappelling off buildings in La Paz.
Top of section
La Paz & Around
History
Shopping
Nightlife
WALKING THE TOWN
La Paz’ history and culture come to life on every corner. Head up the
preposterously steep hills to the myriad museums celebrating Bo- livia’s
archaeology, natural history, culture, crafts, music, revolutions and more.
The town is really an open-air museum itself, with churches dating back
hundreds of years, and living, breathing, seething markets that reflect the
nation’s cultural currents.
CRAFTS SHOPPING
regions at a glance
The markets of La Paz are some of the most compelling in the world. In the
tangle of open-air stalls, covered malls, crafts kiosks and witches’ markets
you can find just about everything under the sun, including crafts and
textiles from across Bolivia, llama fetuses, aphrodisiacs, woodcarvings,
free-trade wares, metal pipes and tin pans. It’s all part of the great whirl of
commerce that drives the nation’s economy and culture.
BRING THE PARTY
La Paz loves to party. And at 3660m, just about everybody’s a lightweight.
Diverse religious and civic festivals are held throughout the year and bring
plenty of daytime parades and pageantry. Come sunset, a parade of different
sorts takes hold in the lounges, discos and bars of Sopocachi. It’s about as
high-octane as you can get without breaking the law.
Click here
Lake Titicaca
History
Hiking
Scenery
BIRTHPLACE OF THE SUN
The Tiwanaku and Inca believed the sun and their civilization were born
from this remarkable body of water, and it remains a great spot to explore
pre-Columbian history.
ISLAND TRAVERSE
In a day or two you can hike from tip to tail of the mystic- al Isla del Sol.
On the way you’ll encounter numerous ruins dating from before the Spanish
conquest. There are also intact indigenous villages, plenty of fun, familyrun restaurants and a chilled-out vibe that’s a traveler’s dream.
WATER AND ICE
There are no bad views over Lake Titicaca. Cros- sing between islands,
you’ll be entranced by mirrored reflections of the nearby Cordillera Real,
while the sunsets and sunrises will burn their imprint into your soul.
Click here
The Cordilleras & Yungas
Trekking
Climbing
Biking
INCA TRAILS
Ancient Inca trails lead from the high Andes to the edge of the Amazon,
taking you through diverse eco- systems, past squawking riots of tropical
birds, indi- genous villages, waterfalls and impressively sheer cliffs.
STEP INTO VERTICAL
Strap on your crampons and ice ax for an ascent of the glaciated peaks of
the Cordilleras Real, Apolobamba and Quimsa Cruz. There are peaks that
have been summited only a handful of times and trade routes good for
novice climbers.
DOWNHILL BIKING
With elevation drops of more than 3000m, this is one of the best downhill
mountain-biking spots in the world. Push the envelope on arm-busting
descents of the World’s Most Dangerous Road, past waterfalls near Sorata
or down seldom-visited single tracks.
Click here
Southern Altiplano
Wildlife
Adventure
Scenery
HIGH-PLAINS FAUNA
Bolivia’s Altiplano is a wilderness of bleak and vast proportions. Up here,
under the sheltering sun, wild herds of vicuña are on the rise. Lucky visitors
will also spot South America’s aloof version of the ostrich, the rhea, plus
any number of Andean camelids.
SALAR DE UYUNI
Adventure abounds on a three- or four-day jeep tour of the Salar de Uyuni.
There are mountain-bike trips and ATV tours from nearby Tupiza, as well
as climbs up massive volcanic peaks and descents into centuries-old mines.
EXTRAORDINARY VIEWS
As you make your way across this remarkable and remote wilderness,
you’ll marvel at the world’s largest salt flat, whimsical rock formations,
cacti-filled valleys straight out of the Old West, volcanic peaks, technicolor
lakes and a sky that seems to stretch forever.
Click here
Central Highlands
Climate
History
Mines
COOL BREEZE
Cochabambinos (residents of Cochabamba) claim that their year-round
spring-like climate makes it the ideal place to live. Whether you are coming
from the sultry lowlands or the freezing highlands, you might just agree.
COLONIAL CHARMS
There is no place in Bolivia that can match the historic majesty of Sucre, a
wonderfully understated town in the foothills of the Andes that gave birth to
the nation’s independence. The museums, cathedrals and open plazas make
this one of Bolivia’s grandest colonial cities.
SILVERY PAST
A visit to the silver mines of Potosí offers an evocative journey into the
region’s past, and an insight into the realities of treasure hunting in any
century.
Click here
South Central Bolivia & the Chaco
Scenery
Wine
Food
WINDSWEPT HIGHLANDS
The arid, thorny hills of the baking-hot Chaco give way to a windswept
highlands landscape peppered with pink-flamingo lakes. There’s a
delightful vibe to the sights around Tarija’s wine country, and plenty of wild
national parks and reserves in between.
OENOPHILIA
Bolivian wine doesn’t often get the credit it deserves, but a few days spent
sampling the goods in El Valle de la Concepción wineries near Tarija will
quickly turn you into a convert, as will the friendly folks that call this land
of wine and honey home.
FOOD
Chapaco (Tarija local) cuisine is unique and inventive and, while some of
the dishes sound more appealing than others, you won’t find a similar menu
elsewhere in the country.
Click here
Santa Cruz & Gran Chiquitania
Food
History
Missions
FOOD
The city of Santa Cruz is low on sights but big on eats, and its cosmopolitan
population offers up a variety of culinary options that will whet the appetite
of even the fussiest eaters.
REVOLUTION
Che pilgrims will make a beeline for La Higuera, where the revolutionary’s
Bolivian project finally came to an end when he was captured and executed,
and Vallegrande, where his body was then displayed.
JESUIT MISSIONS
Wonderfully ornate churches which have been reconstructed in their original style are the centerpieces of the remote towns that make up the Jesuit
Missions Circuit, one of the country’s most surprising and entrancing
highlights.
Click here
Amazon Basin
Adventure
Culture
Wildlife
OUTDOOR ADVENTURE
The very word ‘Amazon’ is synonymous with adventure. Progress is slow
and the insects can be a distraction, but this is a land where nature rules and
you are just a guest.
FESTIVALS UNFETTERED
The exuberant festivals in Trinidad and San Ignacio de Moxos are famous
nationwide for their color and chaos and will leave you no doubt that you
are in the heart of the Amazon.
WILD EXPLORER
Hands down the most bio- diverse region on the planet, the Amazon has
almost mythical status among ecotourists, who are tempted by the
possibility of a fleeting glimpse of a jaguar and wooed by the morning
chorus of howler monkeys.
Click here
On the Road
LA PAZ & AROUND
LA PAZ
AROUND LA PAZ
Valle de la Luna
Mallasa
Valencia & Mecapaca
Muela del Diablo
Valle de las Ánimas
Cañón de Palca
Chacaltaya
Tiwanaku
LAKE TITICACA
Copacabana
Copacabana to Yampupata
Isla del Sol
Isla de la Luna (Koati)
Huatajata
Islas de Wiñaymarka
Around Lake Titicaca
THE CORDILLERAS & YUNGAS
THE YUNGAS
Coroico
El Choro Trek
Takesi Trek
Yunga Cruz Trek
Chulumani
Around Chulumani
Sorata
El Camino del Oro (Gold Digger's Trail)
Mapiri Trail
Guanay
Aucapata & Iskanwaya
Caranavi
CORDILLERA REAL
Huayna Potosí
Illimani
Condoriri Massif
Ancohuma
CORDILLERA APOLOBAMBA
Charazani
Área Natural de Manejo Integrado Nacional Apolobamba
Lagunillas to Agua Blanca (Curva to Pelechuco) Trek
CORDILLERA QUIMSA CRUZ
SOUTHERN ALTIPLANO
ORURO
AROUND ORURO
PARQUE NACIONAL SAJAMA
UYUNI & THE SOUTHWEST CIRCUIT
Uyuni
Salar de Uyuni
Los Lípez
Around Salar de Uyuni
TUPIZA
Around Tupiza
CENTRAL HIGHLANDS
COCHABAMBA
AROUND COCHABAMBA
Parque Nacional Tunari
Cochabamba Area
Cerro Tunari Area
WESTERN COCHABAMBA VALLEY
Quillacollo
Tiquipaya
Villa Albina
Inca-Rakay & Sipe Sipe
EASTERN COCHABAMBA VALLEY
La Angostura
Tarata & Huayculli
Incallajta
Totora
Mizque
Parque Nacional Torotoro
SUCRE
AROUND SUCRE
Tarabuco
Candelaria
Cordillera de los Frailes
POTOSÍ
Around Potosí
SOUTH CENTRAL BOLIVIA & THE CHACO
SOUTH CENTRAL BOLIVIA
Tarija
San Jacinto Reservoir
El Valle de la Concepción
Padcaya & Chaguaya
Reserva Biológica Cordillera de Sama
Reserva Nacional de Flora y Fauna Tariquía
THE CHACO
Yacuiba
Villamontes
Parque Nacional y Área Natural de Manejo Integrado Aguaragüe
Camiri
SANTA CRUZ & GRAN CHIQUITANIA
SANTA CRUZ & AROUND
Santa Cruz
Buena Vista
Parque Nacional & Área de Uso Múltiple Amboró
Santa Cruz to Samaipata
Samaipata
Around Samaipata
Vallegrande
La Higuera
GRAN CHIQUITANIA
Jesuit Missions Circuit
FAR EASTERN BOLIVIA
Quijarro
AMAZON BASIN
CHAPARE REGION
Villa Tunari
Parque Nacional Carrasco
Puerto Villarroel
WESTERN BOLIVIAN AMAZON
Rurrenabaque
Parque Nacional Madidi
San Borja
Reserva Biosférica del Beni
San Ignacio de Moxos
EASTERN BOLIVIAN AMAZON
Trinidad
Santuario Chuchini
Reserva de Vida Silvestre Ríos Blanco y Negro
NORTHERN BOLIVIAN AMAZON
Santa Ana de Yacuma
Barba Azul Reserve
Los Lagos
Guayaramerín
Riberalta
Riberalta to Cobija
Cobija
Top of section
     Includes »
     La Paz
     Around La Paz
     Valle de la Luna
     Mallasa
     Valencia & Mecapaca
     Muela del Diablo
     Valle de las Ánimas
     Cañón de Palca
     Chacaltaya
     Tiwanaku
La Paz & Around
Why Go?
La Paz is a city of Gothic proportions, world-class views and a multi-ethnic
cultural imprint unique to the Americas. It’s sinister and serendipitous –
often at the same time. While there’s plenty of petty crime, traffic and
pollution, La Paz is somehow so unique and so odd that it could very well
become the highlight of your trip.
Most of the city lies within a preposterously steep valley at around
3660m. Medieval-looking buildings ascend the slopes with Seussian
haphazardness finally spilling over the edge into the rough commerce hub of
El Alto, while to the south the three-peaked Illimani (6402m/21,003ft)
watches over it all in stately serenity.
A few days wandering the frenetic markets, high-quality museums, crafts
stalls, cloistered nightclubs and winding alleyways will not disappoint. This
is also the staging center for many hikes, bike trips and excursions into the
fascinating Andean wilderness areas that surround the city.
When to Go
Nov–Apr Rain most afternoons turns the steep streets into torrents.
May–Oct Winter days are cool but sunny, making this La Paz’ high season.
Jan–Jun Festival season includes Alasitas, Gran Poder, Carnaval and
Aymará New Year.
Best Places to Eat
»Pronto ( Click here )
»Mercado Uruguay ( Click here )
»Mongo’s ( Click here )
Best Places to Stay
»Hotel Rosario ( Click here )
»Casa Fusion ( Click here )
»Wild Rover ( Click here )
»A La Maison Appart-Hotel ( Click here )
Lay of the Land
The La Paz metropolitan area is divided into three very distinct zones. North
of the city center is the separate municipality of El Alto (where you arrive if
coming by plane). This fast-growing commercial and industrial city is the
center for Aymará culture, has fascinating markets and few tourist
attractions. Down from here in the valley is the city of La Paz, where most
travelers spend their time. On the west side of the valley are the notable
commercial districts Rosario, Belen, San Pedro and Sopocachi. To the east,
the action centers on the Plaza Murillo, Santa Bárbara and Miraflores
neighborhoods. If you get lost in La Paz, head downhill. You’ll soon enough
find yourself somewhere along the main thoroughfare, El Prado. Further
down the valley to the south is the Zona Sur. This is where the city’s wealthy
live and, with safety a concern in the town proper, many businesses (and
businesspeople) are moving here. There’s a good collection of upscale
restaurants and hotels.
IMMERSING YOURSELF
La Paz will give you what you put in. But the true heart of the city lies behind closed doors, and
the only way to really break through is by learning the language and engaging with locals.
Several language courses will give you the vocabulary you need to learn about La Paz’ unique
history, culture and arts scenes. An especially recommended experience is setting up a homestay,
which you can arrange through some hostels or language schools.
Volunteering is another way to learn about the city. Many travelers end up spending a few
extra weeks in La Paz either working for their hostel or donating their time to one of the many
nonprofits in the area.
La Paz’ Best Views
»Mirador Laikakota ( Click here ) is a mirador (lookout) set above the city’s
largest park. It’s popular with young lovers and old dreamers alike.
»The Radisson Plaza Hotel’s top-floor Aransaya Restaurant ( Click here )
has spectacular city views. The food can be overpriced and formal, but the
views more than make up for it.
»Get vertical with the new rappelling adventures hundreds of feet up a
downtown skyscraper with Urban Rush ( Click here ).
MAIN POINTS OF ENTRY
Most travelers will arrive either at El Alto International Airport or the main bus terminal. Buses
from within Bolivia may also drop you in Villa Fátima or the Plaza 1 de Mayo area. For more
information, see Getting There & Away ( Click here ).
Fast Facts
»Telephone area code: 2
»Population: 1.4 million
»Elevation: 3660m (12,007ft)
Top Tips
»Bring a jacket as at this altitude it’s cold at night year-round.
»Drinking lots of water helps with altitude sickness.
»There’s quite a bit of petty theft in La Paz (and violent attacks are on the
rise), so leave your valuables in the hotel. For more information, Click here .
Resources
»Lonely Planet (www.lonelyplanet.com/bolivia/la-paz)
»Boliviaweb (www.boliviaweb.com)
»Bolivia Online (www.bolivia-online.net)
»La Razón (www.la-razon.com/salimos-hoy.html) Events calendar in
Spanish
»Eventos Bolivia (www.eventosbolivia.com.bo) Entertainment listings in
Spanish
La Paz & Around Highlights
 Wander up from El Prado through tight alleyways to the top of
the valley
 Buy aphrodisiacs as you have your fortune told in the Mercado
de Hechicería ( Click here )
 Get cultured at the Calle Jaén Museums ( Click here )
 Go shopping ( Click here ) till you drop in fair-trade boutiques
along Illampu, El Prado and in the Zona Sur
 Buy the ingredients for a picnic lunch from the street stalls of
the bustling Mercado Negro ( Click here )
 Eat to the beat of folklore music at a peña (folk music venue;
Click here )
 Get dusty as you descend nearly 3600m (12,000ft) by mountain
bike on the World’s Most Dangerous Road ( Click here )
 Dive into history’s past at the Tiwanaku ruins ( Click here )
LA PAZ
History
La Ciudad de Nuestra Señora de La Paz (the City of Our Lady of Peace) was
founded on October 20, 1548, by a Spaniard, Captain Alonzo de Mendoza,
at present-day Laja situated on the Tiwanaku road. Soon after, La Paz was
shifted to its present location, the valley of the Chuquiago Marka (now
called the Río Choqueyapu), which had been occupied by a community of
Aymará miners.
The Spaniards didn’t waste any time in seizing the gold mines, and
Captain Mendoza was installed as the new city’s first mayor. Unions
between Spanish men and indigenous women eventually gave rise to a
primarily mestizo population.
C1
D4
C4
Central La Paz - The Prado
 Sights
1 Casa de Murillo
2 Cathedral
3 Iglesia de San Francisco
B4
B3
D1
D3
C2
B5
D1
D1
D4
C4
B2
E4
C4
B5
(see 38)
C4
B5
(see 26)
D5
(see 42)
(see 57)
(see 35)
B5
B5
C2
C1
E2
B5
C4
F5
A4
A3
B4
A4
B4
B6
A3
B5
4 Mercado de Hechicería 5 Mercado Lanza 6 Museo Costumbrista Juan de Vargas 7 Museo de Etnografía y Folklore 8 Museo de Instrumentos Musicales 9 Museo de la Coca
10 Museo de Metales Preciosos 11 Museo del Litoral
12 Museo Nacional del Arte
13 Museo San Francisco
14 Museo Tambo Quirquincho
15 Presidential Palace
 Activities, Courses & Tours
16 Andean Summits
17 Bolivian Journeys
B-Side
18 Calacoto Tours
19 Climbing South America
Downhill Madness
20 Fremen Tours
Madidi Travel
Pico Verde Languages Turisbus
21 Zig-Zag
 Sleeping
22 Arcabucero Hostal Inn
23 Arthy’s Guesthouse
24 Bacoo Hostel
25 Hospedaje Milenio
26 Hostal Maya Inn
27 Hostal Naira
28 Hostal República
29 Hotel Berlina
30 Hotel Continental
31 Hotel Fuentes
32 Hotel Las Brisas
33 Hotel Majestic
34 Hotel Milton
35 Hotel Rosario
36 Hotel Sagárnaga
C4
B5
F5
F5
D4
B5
D5
C3
E3
C5
(see 37)
A4
B4
B2
C5
C2
C5
C5
(see 26)
D2
C4
D2
B5
B5
D4
E5
(see 38)
A4
D5
D5
D5
37 La Casona
38 La Posada de la Abuela
39 Loki Hostel
40 Wild Rover
 Eating
41 Alexander Coffee & Pub
42 Ángelo Colonial
43 Confitería Club de La Paz
44 Confitería Manantial
45 Heladería Napoli
46 Irupana
La Casona Restaurant
47 Martiani Pizza
48 Pepe’s Coffee Bar
49 Restaurant Laza
50 Star of India
 Drinking
51 Bocaisapo
52 Café Sol y Luna
53 Oliver’s Travels
 Entertainment
Peña Huari
54 Peña Marka Tambo
55 Peña Parnaso
56 Teatro Municipal Alberto Saavedra Pérez
 Shopping
57 Artesanía Sorata
58 Comart Tukuypaj
59 El Ceibo
60 Los Amigos del Libro
Spitting Llama Bookstore & Outfitter
61 Tatoo
 Information
62 Banco Mercantil
63 Banco Nacional de Bolivia
64 Cambios América
E5
C6
B5
(see 26)
A4
D5
B5
C2
65 Casa de Cambio Sudamer
66 Instituto Geográfico Militar
67 Lavandería Aroma
Lavandería Maya
68 Laverap
69 Librería Olimpia
 Transport
70 Diana Tours
71 Transporte Aéreos Militares
If the founding of La Paz had been based on anything other than gold, its
position in the depths of a rugged canyon probably would have dictated an
unpromising future. However, the protection this setting provided from the
fierce Altiplano climate and the city’s convenient location on the main trade
route between Lima and Potosí – much of the Potosí silver bound for Pacific
ports passed through La Paz – offered the city some hope of prosperity once
the gold ran out. And by the time the railway was built, the city was well
enough established to continue commanding attention.
In spite of its name, the City of Our Lady of Peace has seen a good deal of
violence. Since Bolivian independence in 1825, the republic has endured
more than 190 changes of leadership. An abnormally high mortality rate
once accompanied high office in Bolivia, and the job of president came with
a short life expectancy. In fact, the presidential palace on the plaza is now
known as the Palacio Quemado (Burned Palace), owing to its repeated
gutting by fire. As recently as 1946 then-president Gualberto Villarroel was
publicly hanged in Plaza Murillo.
Today La Paz is Bolivia’s de facto capital (Sucre remains the
constitutional capital).
LA PAZ IN…
Two Days
Given the altitude and hills, La Paz is best explored at a leisurely pace. Allow a solid day to
acclimatize before really hitting the town hard. You should be able to ‘do’ much of the city in just
MARKET
two days. Start your morning with breakfast on the Prado or a snack – try salteñas (meat and
vegetable filled pastry shells) – around Plaza Avaroa, both perfect spots for watching one of the
world’s highest cities wake up. Stroll the historic cobblestone streets around Iglesia de San
Francisco and Calle Jaén, home to the wonderful Calle Jaén Museums. Tie some cultural
threads together at the Museo de Textiles Andinos Bolivianos, or wander through the interesting
(if slightly over-the-top) artesanía alley Calle Linares, and Mercado de Hechicería (Witches’
Market). From here, head up to the Mercado Negro (Black Market) for amazing sights, sounds,
smells and tastes (but be sure to watch for pickpockets).
Come dusk, head back downhill along the Prado and, if you’re traveling with a special
someone, treat yourself to a sunset smooch at the Mirador Laikakota before donning your
evening threads for a night of fine dining in one of the international eateries in Sopocachi.
Alternatively, kick back in one of the many popular bars around town or enjoy a taste of
traditional music at one of the peñas.
Four Days
Follow the two-day itinerary, then on your third day do a guided walking tour of La Paz or the
wild rock gardens that surround the city in the Valle de la Luna or Muela del Diablo. It’s always
fun to bring a picnic of fresh foods from the markets. On the fourth day take a day trip out to
Tiwanaku to explore the ruins. Or, depending on the season, you could visit Chacaltaya or do a
day’s bike trip on the outskirts of La Paz.
Sights
Most official sights, including museums, are closed during the Christmas
holiday period (December 25 to January 6).
WEST OF EL PRADO
The areas west of the Prado include the fascinating markets around Rosario,
Belen and San Pedro, the cemetery and the sophisticated Sopocachi
neighborhood.
Markets
La Paz’ buzzing, frenetic markets are easily the highlight of any trip. It is
here that the commerce and culture of this modern-day capital collide in a
wonderful riot of honks, shrieks, smells, tastes and Kodachrome moments.
There are open-air markets from Plaza Pérez Velasco uphill to the cemetery
– past Mercado Lanza, and Plazas Eguino and Garita de Lima. The narrow
cobblestone streets off Max Paredes are the center of the action. Locals call
this section the Mercado Negro (Black Market; 6am-8pm). Every day is
market day in La Paz, but Saturdays are especially fun.
CHURCH
MUSEUM
Especially interesting are the sections near Graneros (‘designer’ clothes),
Tumusla and Isaac Tamayo (everything and anything), and between Santa
Cruz and Sagárnaga (tools and building materials). The best place for
electronics is along Eloy Salmón. Be especially careful when wandering
around this part of town: it’s notorious for light fingers. It’s best to take a
taxi here at night.
North of Plaza San Francisco, on Calle Figueroa, the Mercado Lanza
Offline map Google map ( 6am-8pm) is one of La Paz’ main food markets. It
also houses the splendid Flower Market.
Iglesia de San Francisco
Offline map Google map
(Plaza San Francisco) The hewed stone basilica of San Francisco, on the
plaza of the same name, reflects an appealing blend of 16th-century Spanish
and mestizo trends. The church was founded in 1548 by Fray Francisco de
los Ángeles, and construction began the following year. The original
structure collapsed under heavy snowfall around 1610, but it was
reconstructed between 1744 and 1753. The second building was built
entirely of stone quarried at nearby Viacha. The facade is decorated with
stone carvings of natural themes such as chirimoyas (custard apples),
pinecones and tropical birds.
The mass of rock pillars and stone faces in the upper portion of Plaza San
Francisco is intended to represent and honor Bolivia’s three great cultures –
Tiwanaku, Inca and modern.
The cloisters and garden of Museo San Francisco Offline map Google map (
 231-8472; Plaza San Francisco; entrance B$20; 9am-6pm Mon-Sat),
adjacent to the basilica, beautifully revive the history and art of the city’s
landmark. There are heavenly religious paintings, historical artifacts, an
interesting anteroom and a God-like, if quirky, view from the roof.
As one of the city’s focal points, the plaza is often the staging ground for
rallies and protests.
Museo Tambo Quirquincho
Offline map Google map
MARKET
MUSEUM
(Plaza Alonso de Mendoza; admission B$3; 9:30am-12:30pm & 3-7pm
Tue-Fri, 9am-1pm Sat & Sun) This intriguing museum is slated to re-open
after renovations in October 2012. A former tambo (wayside market and
inn), it houses temporary exhibitions. Past exhibitions include cultural
photos of Mexico and Peruvian art.
Mercado de Hechicería
Offline map Google map
(Witches’ Market;) The city’s most unusual market lies along Calles Jiménez
and Linares between Sagárnaga and Santa Cruz, amid lively tourist
artesanías (stores selling locally handcrafted items). What is on sale isn’t
witchcraft as depicted in horror films and Halloween tales; the merchandise
is herbal and folk remedies, plus a few more unorthodox ingredients
intended to manipulate and supplicate the various malevolent and benevolent
spirits of the Aymará world. An example of these types of ingredients is
dried toucan beaks, intended to cure ills and protect supplicants from bad
spirits.
If you’re building a new house you can buy a llama fetus to bury beneath
the cornerstone as a cha’lla (offering) to Pachamama (Mother Earth),
encouraging her to inspire good luck therein. If someone is feeling ill or is
being pestered by unwelcome or bothersome spooks, they can purchase a
plateful of colorful herbs, seeds and assorted critter parts to remedy the
problem. As you pass the market stalls, watch for wandering yatiris (witch
doctors), who wear dark hats and carry coca pouches, and offer (mainly to
locals) fortune- telling services.
Inquiries and photographs taken here may be met with unpleasantness –
ask politely first.
Museo de la Coca
Offline map Google map
(Linares 906, Rosario; admission B$10; 10am-7pm Mon-Fri) Chew on
some facts inside the small, slightly tired Coca Museum, which explores the
sacred leaf’s role in traditional societies, its use by the soft-drink and
pharmaceutical industries, and the growth of cocaine as a party drug. The
displays (ask for a translation in your language) are educational, provocative
and evenhanded.
CHURCH
MUSEUM
CEMETERY
NEIGHBORHOOD
Iglesia Indígena de San Pedro
Offline map Google map
(Plaza San Pedro, San Pedro) Founded in 1549 and finished at the end of
the 18th century after the siege of La Paz by Tupac Katari, the ‘Indigenous
Church of San Pedro’ has baroque and neoclassic touches.
Museo de Arte Contemporáneo Plaza
Offline map Google map
(MAC, Contemporary Art Museum; 16 de Julio 1698, Prado; admission
B$15; 9am-9pm) Better modern art may be found in various other
collections around town, but this private museum wins the gold star for the
most interesting building: a restored 19th-century mansion (one of only four
left on the Prado) with a glass roof and stained-glass panels designed by
Gustave Eiffel. The museum’s eclectic collection housed over three floors is
a mix of reasonable – although not mind- blowing – Bolivian and
international work. You might catch an interesting temporary exhibition on
the ground floor, sometimes free if you ask nicely.
La Paz Cemetery
As in most Latin American cemeteries, bodies are first buried in the
traditional Western way or are placed in a crypt. Then, within 10 years, they
are disinterred and cremated. After cremation, families purchase or rent
glass-fronted spaces in the cemetery walls for the ashes, they affix plaques
and mementos of the deceased, and place flowers behind the glass door.
Each wall has hundreds of these doors, and some of the walls have been
expanded upward to such an extent that they resemble three- or four-story
apartment blocks. As a result the cemetery is an active place, full of people
passing through to visit relatives and leave or water fresh flowers.
It’s possibly most interesting on November 2, the Día de los Muertos (Day
of the Dead), when half the city turns out to honor their ancestors.
Be aware that the area around the cemetery is a little unsavory.
Sopocachi
Sopocachi has some of La Paz’ best restaurants and nightspots. You can
spend a few hours people watching on Plaza Eduardo Avaroa, before
hoofing up to the wonderful views from Monticulo Park.
Be aware that express taxi robberies and muggings are common,
especially at night near Plaza Avaroa and Plaza España. Take a radio taxi.
Central La Paz - Sopocachi
A2
B2
C2
D2
E2
F1
B2
C3
F6
(see 7)
D5
D3
D4
(see 7)
C2
D4
C2
C4
D5
A2
D4
A2
E6
B2
C5
C6
E6
C3
B2
D5
B2
E6
A2
D5
 Sights
1 Iglesia Indígena de San Pedro
2 Museo de Arte Contemporáneo Plaza
3 Museo Nacional de Arqueología
4 Parque Raúl Salmón de la Barra
5 Pipiripi
6 Templete Semisubterráneo & Museo al Aire Libre
 Activities, Courses & Tours
7 America Tours
8 Casa del Sol
9 Centro Boliviano-Americano
Gravity Assisted Mountain Biking
10 ie Instituto Exclusivo
11 Magri Turismo
12 SpeakEasy Institute
Urban Rush
 Sleeping
13 Café El Consulado
14 Hotel España
15 Hotel Europa
16 Hotel Madre Tierra
17 La Loge
18 Onkel Inn
19 Radisson Plaza Hotel
20 Residencial Sucre
 Eating
21 Alexander Coffee & Pub
22 Alexander Coffee & Pub
23 Arco Iris
24 Armonía
25 Cafe Blueberries
26 Café Ciudad
27 Cafe La Terraza
28 Cafe La Terraza
29 Dumbo
30 El Arriero
31 Helados Splendid
32 Hiper Maxi
D6
F6
D5
(see 46)
C1
E5
D5
D5
C4
F5
D5
D6
E5
D5
D5
E4
D6
D5
F6
B2
A3
B2
D4
D5
E4
E5
A1
E5
A1
F6
D5
B1
E6
(see 57)
33 Irupana
34 Ketal Hipermercado
35 Kuchen Stube
La Guinguette
36 Mercado Camacho
37 Paceña La Salteña
38 Pronto
39 Restaurant Paladar
40 Sergiu’s Pizza
41
Wagamama
 Drinking
42 Diesel Nacional
43 Green Bar
44 Mongo’
s
45 Reineke Fuchs
 Entertainment
46 Alianza Francesa
47 Cinemateca Boliviana
48 Nueva Acropolis
49 Thelonious Jazz Bar
50
Traffic Dance
 Shopping
51 Bodega La Concepción
52 Campos de Solana/Casa Real
53 Kodak
 Information
54 Argentinian Embassy
55 Australian Consulate
56 Brazilian Embassy
57 Dutch Embassy
58 Ecuadorian Embassy
59 German Embassy
60 InfoTur
61 Italian Embassy
62 Japanese Embassy
63 Migración
64 Paraguayan Embassy
Peruvian Embassy
C5
D5
B2
B2
E4
CHURCH
MUSEUM
 Transport
65 Budget
66 Kolla Motors
67 Lan Airlines
68 Taca
69 TAM Mercosur
EAST OF EL PRADO
East of the Prado you’ll find most of the city’s museums, as well as the
presidential palace.
Cathedral
Offline map Google map
(Plaza Murillo) Although it’s a relatively recent addition to La Paz’
collection of religious structures, the 1835 cathedral is an impressive
structure – mostly because it is built on a steep hillside. The main entrance is
12m higher than its base on Calle Potosí. The cathedral’s sheer immensity,
with its high dome, hulking columns, thick stone walls and high ceilings, is
overpowering, but the altar is relatively simple. Inside, the main attraction is
the profusion of stained-glass work; the windows behind the altar depict a
gathering of Bolivian politicos being blessed from above by a flock of
heavenly admirers.
Beside the cathedral is the Presidential Palace Offline map Google map
(Plaza Murillo), and in the center of Plaza Murillo, opposite, stands a
statue of President Gualberto Villarroel. In 1946 he was dragged from the
palace by vigilantes and hanged from a lamppost in the square. Interestingly
enough, Pedro Domingo Murillo, for whom the plaza was named, met a
similar fate here in 1810.
Museo Nacional del Arte
Offline map Google map
(National Art Museum; www.mna.org.bo; cnr Comercio & Socabay, Casco
Viejo; admission B$15; 9:30am-12:30pm & 3-7pm Tue-Fri, 10am5:30pm Sat, 10am-1:30pm Sun) Near Plaza Murillo, this museum is housed
MUSEUM
MUSEUM
in the former Palacio de Los Condes de Arana. This stunning building was
constructed in 1775 of pink Viacha granite and has been restored to its
original grandeur, in mestizo (mixed) baroque and Andino baroque styles. In
the center of a huge courtyard, surrounded by three stories of pillared
corridors, is a lovely alabaster fountain. The various levels are dedicated to
different eras, from pre-Hispanic works to contemporary art, with an
emphasis on religious themes. Highlights include works by former paceño
Marina Nuñez del Prado. There are regular temporary exhibitions on the
ground floor.
Museo de Etnografía y Folklore
Offline map Google map
(Ethnography & Folklore Museum; www.musef.org.bo; cnr Ingavi &
Sanjinés, Casco Viejo; 9am-12:30pm & 3-7pm Mon-Sat, 9am-12:30pm
Sun) Anthropology buffs should check out this free museum. The building,
itself a real treasure, was constructed between 1776 and 1790, and was once
the home of the Marqués de Villaverde. The highlight is the Tres Milenios
de Tejidos exhibition of stunning weavings from around the country – ask a
guide for a look inside the drawers beneath the wall hangings. It also has a
fine collection of Chipaya artifacts from western Oruro department, a group
whose language, rites and customs have led some experts to suggest that
they are descendants of the vanished Tiwanaku culture, and the Tarabucos,
from near Sucre.
Calle Jaén Museums
(Calle Jaén, Casco Viejo; combination admission B$4; 9am-12:30pm &
2:30-7pm Tue-Fri, 9am-1pm Sat & Sun) These four small, interesting
museums are clustered together along Calle Jaén, La Paz’ finest colonial
street, and can generally be bundled into one visit. Buy tickets at the Museo
Costumbrista.
Also known as Museo del Oro (Gold Museum), the Museo de Metales
Preciosos Offline map Google map (Museum of Precious Metals; Click here ;
Jaén 777) houses four impressively presented salons of pre-Columbian
silver, gold and copper works and pieces from Tiwanaku.
MUSEUM
MUSEUM
Sometimes called the Museo de la Guerra del Pacífico, the diminutive
Museo del Litoral Offline map Google map (Jaén 798) incorporates relics from
the 1884 war in which Bolivia became landlocked after losing its Litoral
department to Chile. The collection consists mainly of historical maps that
defend Bolivia’s emotionally charged claims to Antofagasta and Chile’s
Segunda Región.
Once the home of Pedro Domingo Murillo, a leader in the La Paz
Revolution of July 16, 1809, the Casa de Murillo Offline map Google map
(Jaén 790) displays collections of colonial art and furniture, textiles,
medicines, musical instruments and household items of glass and silver that
once belonged to Bolivian aristocracy. Other odds and ends include a
collection of Alasitas miniatures.
The Museo Costumbrista Juan de Vargas Offline map Google map (cnr
Jaén & Sucre) contains art and photos, as well as some superb ceramic
figurine dioramas of old La Paz. One of these is a representation of akulliko,
the hour of coca-chewing; another portrays the festivities surrounding the
Día de San Juan Bautista (St John the Baptist’s Day) on June 24; another
depicts the hanging of Murillo in 1810. Also on display are colonial artifacts
and colorful dolls wearing traditional costumes. A pleasant cafe is on the
premises.
Museo de Instrumentos Musicales
Offline map Google map
(Museum of Musical Instruments; Calle Jaén 711, Casco Viejo; admission
B$5; 9:30am-1pm & 2-6:30pm daily) The exhaustive, hands-on
collection of unique instruments at this museum is a must for musicians. The
brainchild of charango master Ernesto Cavour Aramayo, it displays all
possible incarnations of the charango (a traditional Bolivian ukulele-type
instrument) and other indigenous instruments used in Bolivian folk music
and beyond. If you don’t happen on an impromptu jam session, check out
Peña Marka Tambo across the street. You can also arrange charango and
wind instrument lessons here for around B$50 per hour.
Museo Nacional de Arqueología
Offline map Google map
MUSEUM
PARK
MUSEUM
MUSEUM
(National Archaeology Museum; Tiahuanacu 93, Casco Viejo; admission
B$10; 9am-12:30pm & 3-7pm Mon-Fri, 9am-noon Sat) Two blocks east
of the Prado, this museum (closed for renovations at press time) holds a
small but well-sorted collection of artifacts that illustrate the most interesting
aspects of Tiwanaku culture – those that weren’t stolen or damaged during
the colonial days, anyway. Some of the ancient stonework disappeared into
Spanish construction projects, while valuable pieces found their way into
European museums or were melted down for royal treasuries. Unfortunately
there are no explanations in English, only Spanish.
Museo de la Revolución Nacional
(Museum of the National Revolution; Plaza Villarroel, Casco Viejo;
admission B$2; 9:30am-12:30pm & 3-7pm Tue-Fri, 10am-noon Sat &
Sun) The first question to ask when approaching this museum is ‘Which
Revolution?’ (Bolivia has had more than 100 of them). The answer is that of
April 1952, the popular revolt of armed miners that resulted in the
nationalization of Bolivian mining interests. It displays photos and paintings
from the era. Located at the end of Av Busch.
Parque Raúl Salmón de la Barra
Offline map Google map
(off Bolívar, Miraflores; daylight) La Paz’ city park has interesting
skyways and the Mirador Laikakota (Av del Ejército; admission US$0.15;
9am-5:30pm). Traveling circuses will often set up here, too.
Pipiripi
Offline map Google map
(Av del Ejército, Miraflores; admission B$3; 10am-6:30pm Sat, Sun &
holidays; ) La Paz’ children’s museum has interactive exhibits and plenty
of stickiness and stinky sock smells over six rambling levels. The views are
awesome, and exhibits include a word forest (English words count), a poet’s
corner, textile and market areas, and a giant scrabble game. To get here take
the gondola from the Mirador Laikakota.
Museo de Textiles Andinos Bolivianos
MUSEUM
(Plaza Benito Juárez 488, Miraflores; admission B$15; 9:30am-noon &
3-6pm Mon-Sat, 10:30am-noon Sun) Fans of Bolivia’s lovely traditional
weaving consider this small textile museum a must-see. Examples of the
country’s finest traditional textiles (including pieces from the Cordillera
Apolobamba, and the Jal’qa and Candelaria regions of the Central
Highlands) are grouped by region and described in Spanish. To get there,
walk 20 minutes northeast from the Prado or catch micros (small buses or
minibuses) 131 or 135, or minibuses marked ‘Av Busch.’
Templete Semisubterráneo & Museo al Aire Libre
Offline map Google map
(Stadium, Miraflores) The open-pit Museo al Aire Libre opposite the
stadium contains replicas of statues found in Tiwanaku’s Templete
Semisubterráneo. The show-piece Megalito Bennetto Pachamama (Bennett
monolith) was moved to Tiwanaku’s new site museum to avoid further
smog-induced deterioration. This place is only worth seeing if you aren’t
able to visit the actual site. If you have some time while you’re here, hoof
your way up to the Killi Killi lookout for breathtaking views.
MARINA NÚÑEZ DEL PRADO
Bolivia’s foremost sculptor, Marina Núñez del Prado, was born on October 17, 1910 in La Paz.
From 1927 to 1929 she studied at the Escuela Nacional de Bellas Artes (National School of Fine
Arts), and from 1930 to 1938 she worked there as a professor of sculpture and artistic anatomy.
Her early works were in cedar and walnut, and represented the mysteries of the Andes:
indigenous faces, groups and dances. From 1943 to 1945 she lived in New York and turned her
attentions to Bolivian social themes, including mining and poverty. She later went through a
celebration of Bolivian motherhood with pieces depicting indigenous women, pregnant women
and mothers protecting their children. Other works dealt largely with Andean themes, some of
which took appealing abstract forms. She once wrote, ‘I feel the enormous good fortune to have
been born under the tutelage of the Andes, which express the richness and the cosmic miracle.
My art expresses the spirit of my Andean homeland and the spirit of my Aymará people.’
During her long career she held more than 160 exhibitions, which garnered her numerous
awards, and she received international acclaim from the likes of Pablo Neruda, Gabriela Mistral,
Alexander Archipenko and Guillermo Niño de Guzmán. In her later years Marina lived in Lima,
Peru, with her husband, Peruvian writer Jorge Falcón. She died there in September 1995 at the
age of 84.
NEIGHBORHOOD
WRESTLING
EL ALTO
A billboard in El Alto announces: ‘El Alto is not part of Bolivia’s problem.
It’s part of Bolivia’s solution.’ Not all would agree, but visiting here is an
experience. Having once been a melting pot for campesinos (subsistence
farmers) and people from all around the country, and with a population of
650,000, El Alto is now a city in its own right. It has a 5% to 6% growth rate
per year and is considered the Aymará capital of the world.
If you arrive by air, below you are dozens of white church spires soaring
up from the brown earth. These were built by a German priest, Padre
Obermaier, renowned in the city for his past and current works (and
longevity). From the canyon rim at the top of El Alto Autopista (toll road) or
the top of the free route at Plaza Ballivián, the streets hum with almost
perpetual activity. It’s hard to distinguish one street from another – the miles
of orange brick and adobe houses, shops, factories and markets create a
hectic atmosphere at every corner.
Taxis to El Alto charge around B$50 from the center of La Paz. Micros
marked ‘Ceja’ or ‘El Alto’ will get you here for B$3.
La Ceja
In the lively La Ceja (Brow) district, which commands one of the highest
real-estate prices in the region for its commercial value, you’ll find a variety
of electronic gadgets and mercantile goods. For an excellent market
experience don’t miss the massive Mercado 16 de Julio ( 6am-3pm Thu
& Sun), which stretches for many blocks along the main thoroughfare and
across Plaza 16 de Julio. This shopaholic’s paradise has absolutely
everything, from food and electronics, to vehicles and animals, all at
reasonable prices. Heads up: watch your wallet in both senses of the phrase.
Cholitas Wrestling
(www.cholitaswrestling.com; Polifuncional de la Ceja de El Alto (stadium);
B$80; 3:30pm Sun) Wrestling matches between indigenous women
(derogatively called cholitas) has become popular in recent years. The
staged bouts take part in El Alto on Sunday afternoons. You can go on your
LOOKOUT
RAPPELLING
own, but for ease of mind, many choose to get there by booking online or
through a Sagárnaga tour agency.
Tupac Katari Mirador
For a great view of La Paz head in a taxi to the Tupac Katari Mirador,
situated right on the edge of the rim that plunges down the valley to La Paz.
It was – and is – a sacred Inca site and ritual altar where Tupac Katari is
believed to have been drawn and quartered by colonialists. The colonialists
constructed and interred a statue of Christ on the same site, but that didn’t
stop locals from performing spiritual rituals here.
Around the mirador (lookout) and as far as the eye can see is a long line
of small identical blue booths, distinguished only by a number. These house
curanderos (healers) or yatiris, who provide sage advice. Note: the counsel
of a yatiri is taken extremely seriously; please be sensitive to this – both
photos and tourist appointments are considered inappropriate and are not
appreciated.
ARTE AL AIRE LIBRE
La Paz Mayor Juan del Granado created Arte al Aire Libre (on the Kantutani, btwn Calles 16 &
14, Obrajes, along the river, Zona Sur). This wonderful open-air art gallery features around 15
giant artworks that focus on La Paz and surrounds, from images of Illimani to notable painters of
La Paz. Works change every three months.
Activities
You’ll get plenty of exercise hoofing up and down the Prado but you don’t
have to head far out of town for a real adrenaline rush.
Urban Rush
Offline map Google map
YOGA
MOUNTAIN BIKING
MOUNTAIN BIKING
MOUNTAIN BIKING
( 231-3849; www.urbanrushbolivia.com; 16 de Julio 1490 No 10, Edificio
Avenida) Run by Gravity Assisted Mountain Biking, this company offers an
urban rappel down the Hotel Presidente. Two rappels cost B$200.
Casa del Sol
Offline map Google map
( 244-0928; www.yogabolivia.com; Goitia 127, Prado; 2hr class B$35;
6:30am-11pm) Casa del Sol offers Hatha yoga classes to get the kinks out.
Mountain Biking
There are tons of mountain-biking options just outside of La Paz.
Intermediate riders can take on a thrilling downhill ride on the World’s
Most Dangerous Road, while advanced riders may wish to go for the less
traveled Chacaltaya to Zongo route, the rides near Sorata, or include a bit
of single track on the top of the Dangerous Road route for an extra B$100.
Beginners not quite ready for the death road may wish to check out the
Balcón Andino descent near the Zona Sur, a 2400m roller coaster on a wide
dirt road.
Gravity Assisted Mountain Biking
Offline map Google map
( 231-3849; www.gravitybolivia.com; 16 de Julio 1490 No 10, Edificio
Avenida, Prado) This knowledgeable, highly regarded and professional
outfit has an excellent reputation among travelers and tip-top Kona downhill
bikes. Its Dangerous Road Trip (B$750 per person) ends with hot showers,
an all-you-can-eat buffet and a tour of the Senda Verde animal refuge.
B-Side
Offline map Google map
( 211-4225; Linares 943, Rosario) B-Side is recommended for the Coroico
trip (B$310 to B$690 per person). It receives positive reports from travelers
and hooks you up with a bike operator based on the type of bike you want,
the size of the group and your experience level.
Andean Epics
CLIMBING
CLIMBING
CLIMBING
( 712-76685; www.andeanepics.com) This operator is your best bet for
rides near Sorata. It was moving at the time of writing, so check out the web
for its new location.
Climbing
La Paz is the staging ground for most of the climbs in the Cordilleras. From
here novice climbers can arrange trips to Huayna Potosi (two to three days,
B$900 to B$1100), while more experienced climbers may look to climb
Illimani (four to five days, US$485), Sajama (five days, US$650),
Parinacota (four days, US$530) and beyond.
Andean Summits
Offline map Google map
( 242-2106; www.andeansummits.com; Muñoz Cornejo 1009, Sopocachi)
Offers a variety of outdoor activities from mountaineering and trekking to
4WD tours in Bolivia and beyond. The owners are professional
UIAGM/IFMGA mountain guides.
Asociación de Guias de Montaña
( 214-7951; www.agmtb.org) Certifies guides in Bolivia. It’s worth
checking out its information before deciding on a guide operation.
Climbing South America
Offline map Google map
( 297-1543; www.climbingsouthamerica.acom; Linares 940, 2nd fl,
Rosario) Climbing South America is a reputable operator.
Hiking
Except for the altitude, La Paz and its environs are made for hiking. Many
La Paz tour agencies offer daily ‘hiking’ tours to Chacaltaya, a rough 35km
drive north of La Paz, and an easy way to bag a high peak without having to
do any really hard-core hiking. Head to Valle de la Luna, Valle de las
Animas or Muela del Diablo for do-it-yourself day hikes from La Paz.
Other longer day trips or guided tours take you to the Hampaturi Valley and
Parque Nacional Cotopata.
DEADLY TREADLIES & THE WORLD’S
MOST DANGEROUS ROAD
Many agencies offering La Cumbre to Coroico mountain-bike plunge give travelers the T-shirts
boasting about surviving the road. Keep in mind that the gravel road is narrow (just over 3.2m
wide), with precipitous cliffs with up to 600m drops and few safety barriers.
In March 2007 a new replacement road opened. Prior to this, the road between La Paz and
Coroico was identified as ‘The World’s Most Dangerous Road’ (WMDR) by an Inter-American
Development Bank (IDB) report. Given the number of fatal accidents that have occurred on it
over the years, the moniker was well deserved. An average of 26 vehicles per year disappeared
over the edge into the great abyss.
Crosses (aka ‘Bolivian caution signs’) lining the way testify to the frequency of vehicular
tragedies from the past. The most renowned occurred in 1983 when a camión (flatbed truck)
plunged over the precipice, killing the driver and 100 passengers in the worst accident in the
sordid history of Bolivian transportation.
With the new road up and running, the old road – the WMDR – is now used almost exclusively
by cyclists, support vehicles and the odd tourist bus.
Around 15 cyclists have died doing the 64km trip (with a 3600m vertical descent) and readers
have reported close encounters and nasty accidents. Ironically, the road – now traffic-free – can
be more dangerous to cyclists, especially for kamikaze freewheeling guides and overconfident
cyclists who think they don’t have to worry about oncoming vehicles. Other accidents are due to
little or no instruction and preparation, and poor-quality mountain bikes; beware bogus rebranded
bikes and recovered brake pads.
Unfortunately, even though it is such an adventurous activity, there are no minimum safety
standards in place for operators of this trip, and no controls over false advertising, or
consequences for unsafe operating practices. In short, many agencies are less than ideal. As such
the buyer has to be aware, even a bit paranoid; this is one activity where you don’t want to be
attracted by cheaper deals. Experienced and trained guides, high-quality bikes, well-developed
risk-management systems, and adequate rescue equipment all cost money, and cheaper
companies may stretch the truth about what they provide if it means making another sale. Cost
cutting can mean dodgy brakes, poor-quality parts and, literally, a deadly treadly. This, plus
inexperienced and untrained guides and little or no rescue and first-aid equipment, is a truly scary
combination on the WMDR.
Nuts & Bolts
The trip begins around 7am in La Paz. Your agency will arrange a hotel pickup. From there,
you bus it up to the cumbre (summit), about 45 minutes outside La Paz. Trips cost anywhere from
B$310 to B$750, but you get what you pay for. Advanced riders can include a fun section of
single track up top for an extra B$100. Most operations provide a solid buffet lunch in Coroico,
ECOTOUR
LANGUAGE COURSE
and some even have arrangements with hotels for showers and swimming pool rights. There is a
B$25 surcharge to use the old road. Bring sunscreen, a swimsuit and dust-rag (if they don’t
provide one), and ask about water allotments. The bus takes you back up in the early evening;
expect to arrive in La Paz around 9pm.
La Paz on Foot
( 7154-3918, 224-8350; www.lapazonfoot.com; 400 Prolongación
Posnanski, Miraflores) This is a tip-top operation run by the passionate
English-speaking ecologist Stephen Taranto, and offers a range of activities,
including walks in and around La Paz, Apolobamba, the Yungas, Chulumani,
Madidi and Titicaca. The fascinating, fun and interactive La Paz urban trek
(half-day tours B$160 to B$175, day tours B$295 to B$315, depending on
group size) heads from the heights of El Alto to the depths of Zona Sur.
Other tours include art and architecture, living history, stimulants (think
coca, cocoa and coffee) and a mural explorer tour. Trips further afield
include a three-day Pacha trek, a four-day Condor trek, a Yungas coca tour,
and various nature trails. Multilingual guides are available.
Courses
For musical instruction (in Spanish) on traditional Andean instruments (such
as the zampoña, quena, charango) inquire at the Museo de Instrumentos
Musicales ( Click here ).
Note that not everyone advertising language instruction is accredited or
even capable of teaching Spanish, however well they speak it, so seek local
and personal recommendations, and examine credentials before signing up.
Plan on paying around B$60 per hour for individual instruction and B$30 to
B$50 for group lessons. Many schools can offer homestays (on a weekly or
monthly basis) that include three meals a day and cost around US$350 per
month. Living with a Bolivian family is an amazing cultural experience and
the best way to learn the language.
ie Instituto Exclusivo
Offline map Google map
( 242-1072; www.institutoexclusivo.com; 20 de Octubre 2315, Sopocachi)
Specialized courses for travelers and professionals.
LANGUAGE COURSE
LANGUAGE COURSE
GUIDED TOUR
Pico Verde Languages
Offline map Google map
( 231-9828; www.pico-verde.com; Sagárnaga 363, 2nd fl, Rosario) Offers
flexible schedules and homestays.
SpeakEasy Institute
Offline map Google map
( 244-1779; www.speakeasyinstitute.com; Arce 2047, Prado) Specialized
courses for travelers and professionals.
Tours
Many of Bolivia’s tour agencies are based in La Paz. Some are clearly better
than others (note: many are not formally registered; check carefully if
choosing between those on Sagárnaga), and many specialize in particular
interests or areas. Most agencies run day tours (B$70 to B$500 per person)
in and around La Paz, to Lake Titicaca, Tiwanaku, Zongo Valley,
Chacaltaya, Valle de la Luna and other sites. See also Click here for more La
Paz–based tour agencies.
Mundo Quechua
( 279-6145; www.bolivia-travel.net; Circunvalación 43, Achumani, Zona
Sur) French- and English-speaking owners who offer tailor-made tours
around Bolivia, including Salar de Uyuni, Tiwanaku, Sajama – whatever you
want. Prices vary according to group size and trip.
LUSTRABOTAS
Around La Paz and the rest of Bolivia lustrabotas (shoeshine men and boys) are a familiar sight
and hound everyone with footwear, even those sporting sandals. Many lustrabotas, especially the
older ones, wear ski masks and baseball caps – it’s said that they often do so to avoid social stigma,
as many are working hard to support families or pay their way through school. You can support
their cause for between B$2 and B$3.
BUS TOUR
HIKING
AYMARÁ
RELIGIOUS
Viajes Planeta
(www.lapazcitytour.net) Viajes Planeta runs tours of the city and Zona Sur in
a red, double-decker, city-tour bus (B$50 per person; around three hours).
Stops on the Zona Sur trip include Valle de la Luna (admission B$15). The
recorded narration is in seven languages. Tickets can be purchased in many
travel agencies, or on the bus. Buses depart from Plaza Isabel Católica at
9am and 3pm for city tours, and 10:30am and 1:30pm from the Zona Sur.
Zig-Zag
Offline map Google map
( 245-7814; www.zigzagbolivia.com; Office 5, Illampu 867, Rosario)
Offers a range of trekking tours (including Choro and Takesi), beginners’
climbs and custom-made adventures around Bolivia.
Festivals & Events
La Paz is always looking for an excuse to celebrate. Check with the InfoTur
( Click here ) for a complete list of what’s on.
Alasitas
During Inca times the Alasitas (Aymará for ‘Buy from me’; in Spanish it’s
Cómprame) fair coincided with the spring equinox (September 21), and was
intended to demonstrate the abundance of the fields. The date underwent
some shifts during the Spanish colonial period, which the campesinos
weren’t too happy about. In effect they decided to turn the celebration into a
kitschy mockery of the original. ‘Abundance’ was redefined to apply not
only to crops, but also to homes, tools, cash, clothing, cars, trucks, airplanes
and even 12-story buildings. The little god of abundance, Ekeko (‘dwarf’ in
Aymará), made his appearance and modern Alasitas traditions are now
celebrated on January 24.
La Festividad de Nuestro Señor Jesús del Gran Poder
Held in late May or early June, El Gran Poder began in 1939 as a candle
procession led by an image of Christ through the predominantly campesino
neighborhoods of upper La Paz. The following year the local union of
CULTURAL
CHRISTIAN
FOLKLORE
embroiderers formed a folkloric group to participate in the event. In
subsequent years other festival-inspired folkloric groups joined in, and the
celebration grew larger and more lively. It has now developed into a unique
La Paz festival, with dancers and folkloric groups from around the city
participating. Embroiderers prepare elaborate costumes for the event and
upwards of 25,000 performers practice for weeks in advance. El Gran Poder
is a wild and exciting time, and offers a glimpse of Aymará culture at its
festive finest. A number of dances are featured, such as the suri sikuris (in
which the dancers are bedecked in ostrich feathers), the lively kullasada,
morenada, caporales and the inkas, which duplicates Inca ceremonial
dances.
Fiestas de Julio
This month-long cultural series at the Teatro Municipal features much folk
music throughout July.
Virgen del Carmen
The patron saint of the department of La Paz gets her own public holiday
(July 16), which includes many dances and parades.
Entrada Folklórica de Universitaria
Held on the last Saturday in July, and with an atmosphere alluding to
Carnaval, hundreds of dance groups made up of students from around the
country perform traditional dances through the streets of La Paz.
EKEKO
Ekeko is the household god and the keeper and distributor of material possessions. During
Alasitas his devotees collect miniatures of those items they’d like to acquire during the following
year and heap them onto small plaster images of the god. He’s loaded down with household
utensils, baskets of coca, wallets full of miniature currency, lottery tickets, liquor, chocolate and
other luxury goods. The more optimistic devotees buy miniature souped-up camiones (trucks),
1st-class airline tickets to Miami and three-story suburban homes! Once purchased, all items
must be blessed by a certified yatiri (witch doctor) before they can become real. If this apparent
greed seems not to be in keeping with Aymará values – the community and balance in all things –
BOUTIQUE HOTEL
BOUTIQUE HOTEL
it’s worth noting that Ekeko is also charged with displaying that which a family is able to share
with the community.
Sleeping
Most backpackers beeline for central La Paz to find a bed. The area around
the Mercado de Hechicería (Witches’ Market; between Illampu, Santa Cruz
and Sagárnaga) is about as close as Bolivia gets to a travelers’ ghetto. If you
want to live closer to movie theaters, a wider array of restaurants and a bar
or two, consider staying closer to Sopocachi. For more upmarket luxury,
look along the lower Prado and further south in the Zona Sur. The Lonely
Planet effect is in full force in La Paz, and our top picks often require
reservations.
All places reviewed here claim to have hot water at least part of the day;
few have it all the time. Many are cheaper outside high season. Save big on
business hotels by booking with an online aggregator.
WEST OF EL PRADO
 Hotel Rosario $$
Offline map Google map
( 245-1658; www.hotelrosario.com; Illampu 704, Rosario; s/d/tr/q/ste incl
breakfast B$553/553/623/700/868; ) The professional, English-speaking
staff at La Paz’ best three-star hotel pamper you with five-star treatment.
The ultraclean rooms in the well-maintained colonial residence all have
solar-powered hot showers, cable TV and heaters. There is free internet and
a generous breakfast buffet at the Tambo Colonial. Groups love it, so reserve
ahead.
Casa Fusion $$
( 214-1372; www.casafusion.com.bo; Miguel de Cervantes 2725,
Sopocachi; s/d incl breakfast B$280/370; ) While it does lack a little
personality, the Casa Fusion is probably your best midrange bet in town for
comfort, value and convenience. The brand-spanking-new Sopocachi
boutique has modern clean lines, more Scandinavian furnishings than you’ll
HISTORIC HOTEL
HOTEL
HOSTEL
B&B
find in your local Ikea store, thick down comforters, blazing hot showers and
friendly service. The top-story rooms have the best views.
La Casona $$$
Offline map Google map
( 290-0505; www.lacasonahotelboutique.com; Mariscal Santa Cruz 938,
Prado; incl breakfast s B$490, d B$595-650, ste B$740-950; ) A new
entrant in the luxury boutique category, La Casona has 15 rooms in a
beautifully restored colonial-era building surrounding a small courtyard.
While the bathrooms could be a bit better designed (and we really wish there
was a good common area other than the rooftop terrace), the rooms with
high ceilings, exposed wood beams and thoughtful Andean textile accents
are welcome retreats.
La Posada de la Abuela $$
Offline map Google map
( 233-2285; www.hostalabuelaposada.com; Linares 947, Rosario; s/d/tr
incl breakfast B$210/280/350; ) Readers praise this pleasant oasis in the
heart of the artisan and tourist center. The rooms are sterile and clean (some
have internally facing windows), and the plant-filled courtyard adds a
colorful, if potentially noisy, touch. Reserve ahead – it’s popular with
groups.
Onkel Inn $$
Offline map Google map
( 249-0456; www.onkelinn.com; Colombia 257, Sopocachi; dm/s/d/tr incl
breakfast B$60/200/250/300; ) This bright, HI-affiliated place is in a
fabulous spot between San Pedro and El Prado. It’s less of a scene than the
hostels up by the terminal, making it good for tranquilo travelers. The dorm
rooms are the nicest in La Paz with crispy-cream orange bedcovers and a
bright modern feel. Some of the dorm bunks will leave you with vertigo.
A La Maison Appart-Hotel $$
( 241-3704; www.alamaison-lapaz.com; Pasaje Muñoz Cornejo 15,
Sopocachi; s/d incl breakfast B$385/455; ) While it’s a bit difficult to
HOTEL
BUSINESS HOTEL
HOTEL
HOTEL
find, this top-flight Sopocachi midrange choice has whimsical art
throughout, funked-out and tasteful rooms complete with kitchenettes, cable
TV and sitting areas, and a home-spun family friendliness that’s especially
attractive for long-stay visitors and families.
La Loge $$
Offline map Google map
( 242-3561; www.lacomedielapaz.com; Pasaje Medinacelli 2234, La
Comédie Art-Cafe Restaurant, Sopocachi; apt B$400; ) Oooh la la! This
one is tops. The attention to detail in these light, bright and airy self-catering,
serviced apartments is French in flavor – and that means bon goût (good
taste).
Radisson Plaza Hotel $$$
Offline map Google map
( 244-1111; www.radisson.com/lapazbo; Arce 2177, Prado; incl breakfast
s/d US$160/180, ste US$240-280; ) The Radisson has everything
you’d expect in a five-star hotel, even if its pink walls are like totally 1983
and the lobby is quite smoky. Rooms include giant resort beds, great views
and your typical hodge-podge of high-market amenities, making this the best
business hotel option in the center. Ask for a south- facing room for the best
views. The top-floor Aransaya Restaurant affords a superb view over the city
and surrounding mountains.
Hostal Naira $$
Offline map Google map
( 235-5645; www.hostalnaira.com; Sagárnaga 161, Rosario; s/d/tr incl
breakfast B$220/320/452; ) You can’t get a better location – right at the
bottom of Sagárnaga near the Plaza San Francisco. The rooms are also quite
comfortable with vaulted ceilings, slightly bowed mattresses and no dirt
within sight. It can be a bit noisy at night.
Hotel Las Brisas $$
Offline map Google map
HISTORIC HOTEL
HOTEL
HOTEL
HOTEL
( 246-3691; www.hotelbrisas.net; Illampu 742, Rosario; s/d/tr incl
breakfast B$150/250/340; ) This is a solid budget bet with a ‘Bolivia
moderna’ style – think stark, but neat rooms (some with internal windows),
funky murals and crispy sheets coupled with a few shabby bits and external
glassy walls. The rooms at the front have excellent views and the staff are
friendly, but the whole place does smell a little like Thai food.
Arcabucero Hostal Inn $$
Offline map Google map
( 231- 3473; Liluyo 307, Rosario; s B$95-155, d/tr B$180/200; ) The
nine quiet rooms at this restored colonial home are arranged around an
ornate, plant-filled indoor courtyard. The saggy mattresses, however, should
be relegated to the inn’s otherwise quirky antique decorations, as should the
pillows and electric showers.
Hotel Fuentes $$
Offline map Google map
( 231-3966; www.hotelfuentesbolivia.com; Linares 888, Rosario; s/d/tr
incl breakfast B$160/190/270; ) This cozy place is just-ever-so-slightly
overpriced. Nevertheless, there’s friendly service, and the basic rooms with
bowed beds and parquet floors, cable TV and hot water are certainly do-able.
Some rooms on the higher levels have superlative views. A book exchange
is a nice bonus.
Hotel Berlina $$
Offline map Google map
( 246-1928; www.hotelberlina.com; Illampu 761, Rosario; s/d/tr/q
B$250/350/450/550; ) While the lobby promises shiny things, the
spacious rooms are stark and have a slightly unpleasant smell, though they
do seem clean. It lacks a bit of personality, but seems a reliable bet. Ask for
an east-facing room on an upper story for the best views. Road-front views
can be noisy.
Hotel Madre Tierra $$
Offline map Google map
HOTEL
HOTEL
HOTEL
HOTEL
( 241-9910; www.hotelmadretierra.com; Av 20 de Octubre, Sopocachi; s/d
B$290/360; ) One of the newer additions in the stylish Sopocachi
neighborhood, this modern, slightly overpriced offering has a very nice
common area in which to meet other independent travelers. Unfortunately,
the rooms are quite dark, and those facing the road can get noisy. Solid
mattresses, cleanliness (after all, it is next to godliness), minibars and cable
TV make up for the drawbacks.
Hotel Continental $
Offline map Google map
( 245-1176; www.hotelcontinentalbolivia.com; Illampu 626, Rosario;
s/d/tr $90/140/200, without bathroom B$60/120/170; ) This dark and
slightly dreary downtown option is popular among thrift-sters. The detergent
smell can be overpowering, but at least you know somebody was cleaning
the place.
Hostal Maya Inn $
Offline map Google map
( 231-1970; www.hostalmaya.com; Sagárnaga 339, Rosario; s/d incl
breakfast B$90/160; ) This is a friendly, if basic, place. The most
appealing rooms have windows (note: a few don’t), although rooms at the
front can be a little noisy. Nonsmokers may be bothered by the smokiness,
and the electric showers can be rough for hot-water lovers.
Hotel Sagárnaga $
Offline map Google map
( 235-0252; www.hotel-sagarnaga.com; Sagárnaga 326, Rosario; s/d/tr
incl breakfast B$140/180/240; ) The knight in shining armor at the front
desk (and no, we’re not talking about the receptionist, although he is
friendly) and the mirrors are the brightest things in this otherwise slightly
tarnished and smoky, yet wholly adequate, ’80s-style place. East-facing
rooms are the best, and decent solar showers should keep you warm come
bath-time.
Hotel Milton $
HOTEL
HOTEL
HOTEL
Offline map Google map
( 235-3511; homilton@acelerate.com; Illampu 1126-1130, Rosario; s/d/tr
incl breakfast $100/150/225; ) Tune in and drop out! This ’70s pad truly
is a paradise lost with red vinyl-studded walls, painted murals and funky
wallpaper. Darker rooms at the back are a bit dingy, but the higher and
lighter front rooms afford stupendous views over La Paz, making this a solid
budget bet.
Residencial Sucre $
Offline map Google map
( 249-2038; Colombia 340, Rosario; s/d B$90/140, r per person without
bathroom B$60) This place hasn’t been refurbished since the ’50s, and it’s
pretty beat down, man. If it weren’t so damned cheap, we’d boot it from the
book.
Hotel España $$
Offline map Google map
( 244-2643; 6 de Agosto 2074, Prado; s/d/tr B$190/270/360; ) This
place is a bit like a great aunt – friendly with a colorful personality but everso-slightly worse for wear. It’s a slightly overpriced colonial place, with a
lovely, sunny courtyard and garden, and worn rooms. It’s an easy stroll to
many of the city’s best restaurants and nightlife spots. Rates include cable
TV.
Hotel Majestic $
Offline map Google map
( 245-1628; hot.majestic@gmail.com; Calle Santa Cruz 359, Rosario;
s/d/tr incl breakfast B$90/140/210; ) Calling yourself Majestic won’t
necessarily make it so. And while its pink bathrooms, smart parquet floors
and cable TV provide some distraction from the dirty baths and stanky-likea-field-mouse rooms, this is one of those last-ditch choices that’s good for a
night and not much more.
EAST OF EL PRADO
HOSTEL
GUESTHOUSE
HOSTEL
HISTORIC HOTEL
Wild Rover $
Offline map Google map
( 211-6903; www.wildroverhostel.com; Comercio 1476, Miraflores; dm
B$45-65, s without bathroom $65; ) Your best bet to meet fellow
travelers, the Wild Rover has a high-octane take-no-prisoners vibe that 20-
somethings will love and 30-somethings will loathe. The rooms at some
other hostels are better, and the dorm rooms are too tightly packed, but
you’ll be spending most of your day at the boisterous Irish pub anyway.
Arthy’s Guesthouse $
Offline map Google map
( 228-1439; arthyshouse@gmail.com; Ismael Montes 693, Bus Terminal; r
per person without bathroom B$80; ) This clean and cozy place hidden
behind a bright orange door deservedly receives rave reviews as a ‘tranquil
oasis,’ despite its location on one of La Paz’ busiest roads. The friendly,
English-speaking owners will do all they can do to help you. Kitchen
facilities are available. Note, though, that there is a midnight curfew.
Hostal República $
Offline map Google map
( 220-2742; www.hostalrepublica.com; Comercio 1455, Miraflores; dm/s
without bathroom B$50/140, d/apt B$229/553; ) Three blocks from the
historic heart of the city (up a seriously steep hill), this hostel occupies a
lovely historic building that was home to one of Bolivia’s first presidents. Its
two large courtyards make for a quiet oasis, and it has an extremely chilled
air. All the rooms are fairly basic (those downstairs can be dank and musty),
but will make for a pleasant, if unremarkable, stay. The apartment sleeps
five.
Café El Consulado $$$
Offline map Google map
( 211-7706; www.cafeelconsulado.com; Calle Bravo 299; s/d incl
breakfast B$560/700, ste incl breakfast B$560-980; ) You’ll feel every
bit the VIP in one of these five delightful rooms, housed in a converted
consulate and stunning colonial building, above the cafe of the same name.
HOSTEL
HOSTEL
BUSINESS HOTEL
HOTEL
This boutique place oozes European style (it’s Danish run), with large, airy
and spacious rooms in a quiet location. Those with private bathrooms have
clawed baths.
Loki Hostel $
Offline map Google map
( 211-9034; www.lokihostel.com; Loayza 420, Bus Terminal; dm B$44-60,
d B$140-160; ) This party hostel has a gilded bar, bean-bag hangout
area and more than 180 beds. The rooftop terrace is dope and the rooms can
get a bit dark, and all-in-all there’s some sort of strange vibe going on.
Bacoo Hostel $
Offline map Google map
( 228-0679; www.bacoohostel.com; Alto de la Alianza 693, Bus Terminal;
dm B$40-60, d B$160; ) This sprawling party-focused hostel has a bar
and Jacuzzi (ooh-la-la), and plenty of travelers looking to hook up (both
literally and figuratively). Welcomed touches include down comforters and
thick mattresses. Dorm rooms range from four to 20 people, so book ahead
or bring ear plugs. There’s a rather unkempt feel to the place, but you’re
close to the bus station and Calle Jaén.
Hotel Europa $$$
Offline map Google map
( 231-5656; www.hoteleuropa.com.bo; Tiahuanacu 64, Prado; s/d/ste
US$140/160/240; ) One of the city’s sleekest business hotels, the
Europa’s rooms aren’t as nice as some of La Paz’ other business hotels, but
you do get an excellent spa and pool area (open to the public for a daily-use
fee) and solid business-class rooms and service.
Hospedaje Milenio $
Offline map Google map
( 228-1263; hospedajemilenio@hotmail.com; Yanacocha 860, Casco
Viejo; r per person B$35-40; ) A simple, laid-back joint, run by friendly
staff, with fun common areas, a book exchange and truly dirt-cheap rooms,
the Milenio is a solid budget bet. The best rooms are upstairs and outward
BUSINESS HOTEL
A1
facing (note that most single rooms have internal windows). The mushy beds
may leave you limping, though.
ZONA SUR
Camino Real $$$
Offline map Google map
( 279-2323; www.caminoreal.com.bo; Ballivián 369, cnr Calle 10,
Calacoto; r incl breakfast B$1500; ) The best business hotel in
town, the towering Camino Real in the Zona Sur has a soaring atrium, and
high-end rooms with flat-screens, updated modern furnishings and great
views of the neighboring bluffs. It’d be nice if there were better common
areas, but the onsite restaurant will do. Booking online through aggregators
will save you big.
Zona Sur
 Sleeping
1 Camino Real
B1
D1
C1
A1
HOTEL
BUSINESS HOTEL
2 Casa Grande
 Eating
3 Chalet La Suisse
4 Coroico in Sur
5 Furusato
Tarapari La Paz $
( 7154-3918; www.lapazonfoot.com; r per person US$22) Fourteen
kilometers from Zona Sur, in the very authentic village of Chicani, is this
tranquil escape: an ecofriendly apartment in a secure location. It’s made of
adobe and its kitchen and bathroom is operated by solar water. It’s the
perfect place to base yourself for day and overnight hikes into the Cordillera
Real – the owner (of La Paz on Foot ( Click here ) tours fame) says you can
be at the base of a glacier within eight hours. Access is by an unsealed road,
45 minutes by minibus from central La Paz (B$4).
Casa Grande $$$
Offline map Google map
( 279-5511; www.casa-grande.com.bo; cnr Ballivián and Calle 17,
Calacoto; s/apt/f incl breakfast B$1255/1395/1675; ) This business
hotel is in need of a serious rehab – especially the lumpy oatmeal pillows –
but with living rooms and kitchens in all the rooms, long-stay visitors may
still want to give it a try.
Eating
For local fare, your cheapest (and sometimes tastiest) bets are the almuerzos
(set lunches) in the countless hole-in-the-wall restaurants; look for the
chalkboard menus out front. As a general rule, the higher you climb from the
Prado, the cheaper the meals will be. Markets and street stalls offer good
prices and interesting experiences, but can be challenging for your stomach.
Sopocachi and the Zona Sur have most of the city’s high-end eateries. Chifas
(Chinese restaurants) are ubiquitous and cheap.
ITALIAN
BOLIVIAN
INTERNATIONAL
INDIAN
Vegetarians are increasingly well catered for these days, and there are
some excellent vegetarian restaurants.
WEST OF EL PRADO
There are plenty of eateries around Sagárnaga. Upscale and international
bites are found in Sopocachi.
 Pronto $$$
Offline map Google map
( 244-1369; Jauregui 2248, Sopocachi; mains B$55-80; 6:30am-11pm
Mon-Sat) We don’t know where (or how) it gets its fresh ingredients, but this
candlelit underground restaurant has figured it out, offering up dish after
dish of thoughtfully prepared, well structured and delicately balanced
antipasti, pasta and mains. The antipasta della casa is a remarkable mix of
stewed tomatoes, walnuts and other wonderful treats. The alchemy of many
of these dishes would leave many a ‘developed world’ chef red-cheeked and
jealous. Call ahead for reservations on the weekends.
La Casona Restaurant $$
Offline map Google map
(Mariscal Santa Cruz 938, Prado; mains B$20-50, almuerzo B$45; 9am9pm; ) The upscale executive set lunch here comes with an extensive salad
bar, soup and your choice of mains like chicken in wine sauce or delicately
crafted milanesas. The colonial atmosphere is quite comfortable, making this
one of the best lunch spots in town. It goes à la carte at night.
Ángelo Colonial $$
Offline map Google map
( 236-0199; Linares 922, Rosario; mains B$20-50) This quirky, darkened
colonial-style restaurant features a ramshackle collection of antiquities –
pistols, swords and antique portraits – plus excellent soups, salads and
luscious vegetable lasagna. You don’t want to be in a hurry – service is slow.
Star of India $$
FRENCH
PIZZA
BRAZILIAN
FAST FOOD
Offline map Google map
(Cochabamba 170, Rosario; mains B$32-45; ) Worthy of a London curry
house (the owner is British), this place is hot. It receives rave reviews by
foreign residents and travelers for its broad menu of tasty Indian foods. It
also serves lassi breakfasts and snacks.
La Guinguette $$
Offline map Google map
(Fernando Guachalla 399, Sopocachi; mains B$45-70; 9am-11pm MonSat) Hang out with the Sopocachi cool cats at this chic spot below the
Alianza Francesa cultural center. The cozy bistro serves an excellent soup,
sandwich and desert combo at lunch for B$45. There are steaks, fish and
rather doughy pasta on the menu, too.
Martiani Pizza $
Offline map Google map
(Illampu 738, Rosario; pizzas B$20-35; 1-9:30pm Mon-Sat) If you
believe the napkin reviewers (one day they’ll put Lonely Planet writers out
of a job for good), this is the best slice in La Paz. We wouldn’t go that far,
but this is a damn good pie, with crispy crust, fresh ingredients and plenty of
savory thrust in the sauce. It’s a small place, so expect to wait a bit.
Restaurant Paladar $$
Offline map Google map
(Fernando Guachalla 359, Sopocachi; mains B$40-60, almuerzo Tue-Fri
B$20; lunch Tue-Sun) This cavernous place serves recommended
Brazilian fare, including feijoada (a bean and meat casserole, typical of
Portugal and Brazil). Heavy drapes, bow-tied waiters and smartly dressed
locals would have you think it’s a pricey joint. And you’d be fooled – all this
for a mere B$20. À la carte dishes are served at weekend lunches.
Paceña La Salteña $
Offline map Google map
(20 de Octubre 2379, Sopocachi; pastries B$5-10; 8:30am-2pm) Eating a
salteña (a baked pastry stuffed with out-of-this-world meat and vegetable
VEGETARIAN
BAKERY
CAFE
CAFE
PIZZA
goodness) is a not-to-be-missed local experience. The peach walls, chintz
curtains and gold trimmings give the fare a gilded edge at this awardwinning salteñería. Vegetarian salteñas are available on weekends only.
Armonía $
Offline map Google map
(Ecuador 2284, Sopocachi; buffet B$29; lunch Mon-Sat; ) A
recommended all-you-can-eat vegetarian lunch is found above Libería
Armonía in Sopocachi. Organic products are served when possible.
Kuchen Stube $
Offline map Google map
(Rosendo Gutiérrez 461, Sopocachi; cakes B$4-30) A favorite for sweet
snacks with decadent German pastries, reasonable coffee, fresh juices and
quiche lorraine.
Cafe Blueberries $$
Offline map Google map
(Plaza Avaroa, Sopocachi; mains B$30-50; ) Tea lovers will enjoy this
relaxed Japanese-owned place – it has a good selection of infusions and
accompanying snacks, from salads to cakes. The pleasant front terrace
overlooks Plaza Avaroa, and the back sunroom overlooks a pretty rose
garden.
Pepe’s Coffee Bar $
Offline map Google map
(Jiménez 894, Rosario; snacks B$10-25) This cheery, inviting, artsy cafe is
tucked away on a sunny bend in the Witches’ Market. It’s a cozy place for
coffee or cocktails. Big breakfasts and veggie lunch options go down easily
while browsing the library of guidebooks and English-language periodicals.
Sergiu’s Pizza $
Offline map Google map
BOLIVIAN
INTERNATIONAL
JAPANESE
ARGENTINIAN
CAFE
(6 de Agosto 2040, Prado; slices from B$12; from 5pm) Popular among
students, this evening-only hole-in-the-wall near the Aspiazu steps serves up
a reasonable New York–style pizza and fast food.
Restaurant Laza $
Offline map Google map
(Bozo 244, Rosario; lunch B$8) Join the locals for cheap eats at this
authentic joint.
EAST OF EL PRADO
Café Ciudad $
Offline map Google map
(Plaza del Estudiante, Prado; mains B$15-40; 24hr; ) This La Paz
institution serves up warm coffee, surly service, yummy pizzas, hamburgers
and other international favorites (plus one of the best pique machos, a
Bolivian dish with sausages and french fries in sauce, in town) 24 hours a
day, seven days a week.
Wagamama $$$
Offline map Google map
(Pinilla 2257, Prado; meals B$45-90; lunch & dinner Mon-Sat) This
Japanese joint, hidden up a quiet lane, has a classy atmosphere and
impeccably presented food. Treat yourself to a teishoku (a feast featuring
‘everything’; B$80).
El Arriero $$$
Offline map Google map
(6 de Agosto 2535, Prado; mains B$65-95, almuerzo $50; lunch &
dinner) This Argentine grill restaurant has good steak but inattentive service.
The chunky imported beef is kept warm on a tableside grill, while a series of
even larger cuts feed three or four. There’s a decent salad bar, but it’s no
vegetarian hangout! The fixed lunch is good value.
Confitería Club de La Paz $
VEGETARIAN
SWISS
Offline map Google map
(cnr Camacho & Mariscal Santa Cruz, Prado; mains B$10-30) For a quick
coffee or empanada, join the well-dressed elderly patrons in their daily
rituals. The cafe was formerly renowned as a literary cafe and haunt of
politicians (and, formerly, of Nazi war criminals); today, it’s better known
for its strong espresso and cakes.
Confitería Manantial $
Offline map Google map
(Potosí 909, Hotel Gloria, Casco Viejo; buffet B$25; lunch Mon-Sat; )
This place has a good-value and popular veggie buffet. Arrive before
12:30pm or you risk missing the best dishes.
EASY EATS
Popular with La Paz’ yuppie set, these chain cafes serve java drinks, good fruit juices and tasty
snacks, sandwiches and international favorites like quesadillas. While they are a bit saccharine,
they’re good spots if your stomach is easily upset.
»Alexander Coffee & Pub Offline map Google map (www.alexandercoffee.com; mains
B$16-40; 6am-11pm) Branches in Prado (16 de Julio 1832), Socabaya (Calle Potosí 1091)
and Sopocachi (20 de Octubre 2463).
»Cafe La Terraza Offline map Google map (mains B$10-40; late) Branches in Prado (16
de Julio 1615) and Sopocachi (20 de Octubre 2331, Montenegro Bloque).
ZONA SUR
Calle Montenegro has a good collection of bars, restaurants and shops all
within walking distance of each other.
Chalet La Suisse $$$
Offline map Google map
( 279-3160; www.chaletlasuisse.com; Muñoz Reyes 1710, Calacoto; mains
B$60-120) This Swiss-run restaurant is as upscale as the name sounds – it’s
JAPANESE
BOLIVIAN
seriously expensive (by Bolivian standards), has a very old-style atmosphere
and is extremely good. Imported cheeses, top local wines and trout dishes
are merely part of the experience. Don’t go here if you’re after Bolivian
atmosphere – it would be as at home in New York or London – but it’s good
fare.
Furusato $$$
Offline map Google map
(Inofuentes 437; mains B$50-109; 12-3pm & 7-11pm Tue-Sun, dinner
only Mon) This place is neater than an origami figure – and fittingly so. It’s
very formal, with exquisite Japanese fare and jaw-splitting views of the
nearby cliff, although friendliness isn’t always on the menu.
Coroico in Sur $
Offline map Google map
(Juli Patino 1526; almuerzo B$15; lunch & dinner Mon-Sat, lunch only
Sun) A great place to join the locals for typical Bolivian lunch dishes of
plato paceño (a dish of fried cheese, corn, beans and potato) and set lunches
in a tranquil garden setting.
ICE CREAM TIME
Despite its cool temps, La Paz is a good spot for ice cream. These are some of our faves:
Heladería Napoli Offline map Google map (Ballivián, Casco Viejo; ice cream B$2-5;
8:30am-10:30pm) Italian-style on Plaza Murillo.
Helados Splendid Offline map Google map (cnr Nicolás Acosta & Av 20 de Octubre, Plaza
San Pedro; ice cream B$2-5) Helados Splendid has been scooping up splendid ice cream for
nearly 50 years.
Dumbo Offline map Google map (16 de Julio s/n, Prado; ice cream B$2-5, mains B$35-50;
) Kids only need apply.
Self-Catering
SUPERMARKET
SUPERMARKET
SUPERMARKET
SUPERMARKET
SUPERMARKET
If you don’t mind the hectic settings and questionable hygiene, your
cheapest and most interesting food options are found in the markets. The
comedor (dining hall) at Mercado Uruguay, off Max Paredes, sells set
meals (of varying standards and in basic surrounds) including tripe and ispi
(similar to sardines) for less than B$8. Other areas to look for cheap and
informal meals include the street markets around Av Buenos Aires, and
the Mercado Camacho Offline map Google map (cnr Av Simon Bolivar &
Bueno), known for its juice stands, fresh breads and puffy llauchas (cheese
pastries). Chain supermarkets include the following:
Ketal Hipermercado
Offline map Google map
(Arce, nr Pinilla, Sopocachi) If you’re off to a picnic, load up here on
everything from olives to cheese, crackers and beer.
Ketal Express
(Plaza España, Sopocachi) Ketal Express is a decent but basic supermarket.
Hiper Maxi
Offline map Google map
(Rosendo Gutiérrez, Sopocachi) A handy supermarket.
Irupana
Offline map Google map Offline map Google map
(Murillo 1014, cnr Tarija, Rosario) Locally made organic produce is sold at
this health-food chain. There is another branch in Sopocachi (cnr Fernando
Guachalla & Av Sanchez Lima, Sopocachi).
Arco Iris
Offline map Google map
(Fernando Guachalla 554, Sopocachi; 8am-8pm Mon-Sat) Arco Iris has
an extensive pastelería (cake shop) and deli featuring fine specialty regional
meat and dairy treats like smoked llama salami, plus products such as fresh
palm hearts and dried Beni fruits.
PUB
PUB
PUB
PUB
Drinking
There are scores of inexpensive, local drinking dens where men go to drink
singani (distilled grape spirit, the local firewater), play cacho (dice) and
eventually pass out. Unaccompanied women should steer clear of these spots
(even accompanied women may have problems).
There are plenty of elegant bars, which are frequented by foreigners and
middle-class Bolivians. Local, gilded youth mingle with upmarket expats at
clubs along 20 de Octubre in Sopocachi and in Zona Sur, where US–style
bars and discos spread along Av Ballivián and Calle 21. These change as
often as fashions, so it’s best to ask around for the latest in-spot.
Bocaisapo
Offline map Google map
(Calle Jaén, Casco Viejo; 7pm-late Thu-Sat) This bohemian favorite has
live music, a maddening elixir de coca drink, plenty of affected La Paz
artsters and a candlelit ambience.
Green Bar
Offline map Google map
(Salinas 596, Sopocachi) For a cloistered pub setting with intellectual types,
girls straight out of a Modigliani painting, weirdos, rockers and other ne’erdo-wells, check out this beloved hole in the wall.
Oliver’s Travels
Offline map Google map
(cnr Murillo & Cochabamba, 2nd fl, Rosario) The worst (or best?) cultural
experience in La Paz is to be had at this pub, thanks to its crowd of mainly
foreign revelers, good beer selection, football, typical English food
(including curries) and popular music. It has a good, if pricey, book
exchange.
Mongo’s
Offline map Google map
PUB
BEER HALL
LOUNGE
LIVE MUSIC
(Manchego 2444, Sopocachi; mains B$30-60; 6pm-3am) The easiest spot
to pull in La Paz – that’s hook up to you Americanos – Mongo’s is a
perennial favorite, with dancing on the tables, excellent pub grub and a good
mix of locals and tourists.
Café Sol y Luna
Offline map Google map
(cnr Murillo & Cochabamba, Rosario; 9am-1am) This is a low-key,
Dutch-run hangout offering cocktails, good coffee and tasty international
meals. It has three cozy levels with a book exchange and an extensive
guidebook reference library (many current Lonely Planet titles), talks, salsa
nights, live music and other activities.
Reineke Fuchs
Offline map Google map
(Jáuregui 2241, Sopocachi; from 6pm Mon-Sat) This Sopocachi
brewhaus features imported German beers, schnappsladen and hearty
sausage-based fare. Also in Zona Sur.
Diesel Nacional
Offline map Google map
(20 de Octubre 2271, Sopocachi; from 7:30pm Mon-Sat) The postmodern
place to escape reality for an overpriced drink with the rich kids. It doesn’t
really get going until late.
Entertainment
Pick up a copy of the free monthly booklet Kaos (available in bars and cafes)
for a day-by-day rundown of what’s on in La Paz. Otherwise, watch hotel
notice boards for bar and live music posters, or check the newspapers.
InfoTur ( Click here ) can also help.
Centro Arte y Culturas Bolivianos
(Ecuador 2582, Sopocachi) This arts complex has rotating exhibits, live
music (Thursday through Saturday), a decent restaurant and terrace cafe.
They call it the Luna Llena rock bar come 8pm.
BREAKING BAD IN BOLIVIA
Bolivia offers plenty of opportunities to ‘Break Bad.’ With its status as a major cocaineproducing nation and a reputation for lax law enforcement, Bolivia is a popular destination for
drug and sex tourism. Travelers who come to Bolivia to engage in these and other marginal
activities can find themselves in trouble, however, as these activities have serious consequences
and legal ramifications.
Prostitution
Prostitution is legal for adults aged 18 and older, and is common throughout the country. While
legal, there are few protections for sex workers or controls on the industry (raising the chances of
contracting an STD). Child prostitution (the average sex worker starts at 16 years old) and human
trafficking are also real issues in the country, especially in the Chapare and major urban centers.
Young children are sold into prostitution, especially from the tropical lowlands, and brought to
large urban centers or sold overseas either as slaves or prostitutes. Trafficking from Paraguay to
Bolivia is on the rise for the ‘mega brothels’ being built near Santa Cruz. In Southern Bolivia,
around 10 children every month are sold into prostitution or slavery, and across the globe some
1.2 million children are victims of human trafficking annually. It’s a US$12 billion annual
industry, and many advocacy organizations say consumers will control its end. Jail sentences for
sex with a minor are 20 to 25 years in Bolivia, and those found guilty will also likely face
criminal charges in their home country. (Sources: Unicef, 2008 US State Department Human
Rights Report, UNHCR, EFE)
Cocaine & Other Drugs
Drug tourism is on the rise in Bolivia. The cocaine is pure, it’s cheap (B$100 to B$150 a gram),
it’s easily attainable, and it remains illegal. The laws are a bit contradictory and ill-defined.
Personal possession, while illegal, is not supposed to carry a jail sentence, but trafficking carries
a minimum eight-year sentence, according to the Andean Information Network. The only
problem: there’s no definition of personal possession. Your best bet is to not do it. If you get
caught, your embassy will not help you. The only option for many travellers is to attempt to pay
their way out of the situation, which is also risky since bribes are illegal, too. It’s also worth
noting that the same criminal organizations producing cocaine are also responsible for human
trafficking; don’t go down dark alleys after midnight looking to score. Moreover, cocaine can be
deadly, especially at Bolivia’s high altitudes.
Marijuana is also common here (and also illegal), while other high-end pharmaceuticals, like
ecstasy, are hard to come by. Hallucinogenics, like the San Pedro cactus and ayahuasca, are
becoming slightly more common and sit in a grey area of the law.
San Pedro Prison
It’s likely you won’t be in La Paz long before you’ll hear about ‘tours’ to San Pedro prison –
from other travelers, or sometimes operators and hostels. We strongly advise against participating
in one of these unofficial – and, in fact, illegal – ‘tours’, which are organized by inmates, guards
and dodgy operators. There are high risks associated with entering San Pedro prison. First, it’s
illegal, and the Bolivian authorities are cracking down on unofficial visits. Secondly, inside the
JAZZ
DANCE
CULTURAL CENTER
CULTURAL CENTER
prison, there’s no protection or guarantee of your safety and, well, you’re surrounded by
criminals.
Bribes
Bribes are illegal in Bolivia, but common. With cops making just over US$115 a month, it’s easy
enough to see why it would be so ubiquitous. People stopped for minor traffic violations or more
serious infractions sometimes ask if they can ‘pay the fine now.’ Watch out for false police –
authentic police officers will always wear a uniform and will never force you to show them your
passport, insist you get in a taxi with them, or search you in public.
Thelonious Jazz Bar
Offline map Google map
(20 de Octubre 2172, Sopocachi; cover charge around B$25; 7pm-3am
Mon-Sat) Bebop fans love this charmingly low-key bar for its live and often
impromptu performances and great atmosphere. A flier on the wall promotes
upcoming sessions.
Traffic Dance
Offline map Google map
(www.trafficsanjorge.com; Arce 2549, Prado) It has lost some pizzazz in
recent times, but is still popular for cocktails, live music – from world beats
to disco – and all the attitude and dancing you can muster.
Cultural Centers
Alianza Francesa
Offline map Google map
( 242-5005; www.alianzafrancesa.org.bo; cnr Fernando Guachalla & 20
de Octubre, Sopocachi) This French cultural center has lectures, courses and
rotating exhibits in French and Spanish. Thursday nights are movie nights.
Goethe Institute
( 243-1916; www.goethe.de; Arce 2708, Prado) The German cultural
center has a library, courses, exhibits and movie nights on Fridays.
CULTURAL CENTER
TRADITIONAL MUSIC
TRADITIONAL MUSIC
TRADITIONAL MUSIC
Nueva Acropolis
Offline map Google map
( 291-1172; www.acropolis.org.bo; Ecuador 2405, Sopocachi; 7:30am10:30pm) This locally run cultural center offers courses, talks and other
intellectual exercises, mostly in Spanish.
Peñas
Typical of La Paz (and most of Bolivia) are folk-music venues known as
peñas. Most present traditional Andean music, rendered on zampoñas,
quenas and charangos, but also often include guitar shows and song recitals.
Many peñas advertise nightly shows, but in reality most only have shows on
Friday and Saturday nights, starting at 9pm or 10pm and lasting until 1am or
2am. Admission ranges from B$30 to B$80 and usually includes the first
drink; meals cost extra.
Peña Marka Tambo
Offline map Google map
( 228-0041; Calle Jaén 710, Casco Viejo; cover charge B$35, mains
B$35-50; from 8pm Thu-Sat) A reasonably priced – and some claim quite
traditional – peña. The food is OK, but the music is better.
Peña Huari
Offline map Google map
( 231-6225; Sagárnaga 339, Rosario; cover charge B$105, buffet dinner
B$100; show 8pm nightly) The city’s best-known peña is aimed at tourists
and Bolivian businesspeople. The attached restaurant specializes in Bolivian
cuisine, including llama steak, Lake Titicaca trout, charquekan (jerky) and
salads. The show starts at 8pm.
Peña Parnaso
Offline map Google map
( 231-6827; Sagárnaga 189, Rosario; cover charge B$80, mains B$35-40;
show 8:30pm) Also open for lunch (B$35) with no show.
CINEMA
THEATER
Cinema
La Paz’ cultural centers often show foreign-language films. Most movies are
in English with Spanish subtitles and cost around B$30. There are several
cinemas along the Prado.
Cinemateca Boliviana
Offline map Google map
(cnr Zuazo & Rosendo Gutiérrez, Prado) Art films gone wild.
Theater
Teatro Municipal Alberto Saavedra Pérez
Offline map Google map
(cnr Sanjinés & Indaburo, Casco Viejo; tickets B$20-50) The Teatro
Municipal Alberto Saavedra Pérez has an ambitious program of folklore
shows, folk-music concerts and foreign theatrical presentations. It’s a great
old restored building with a round auditorium, elaborate balconies and a vast
ceiling mural.
Spectator Sports
The popularity of fútbol (soccer) in Bolivia is comparable to that in other
Latin American countries. Matches are played at Estadio Hernando Siles
(Estadio Olímpico La Paz, Miraflores). Sundays (year-round) are the big
game days, and Wednesdays and Saturdays also have games. Prices vary
(B$20 to B$100) according to seats and whether it’s a local or international
game. You can imagine what sort of advantage the local teams have over
mere lowlanders; players from elsewhere consider the high-altitude La Paz
games a suicide attempt!
Shopping
La Paz is a shopper’s paradise; not only are prices very reasonable, but the
quality of what’s offered can be astounding. The main tourist shopping area
lies along the very steep and literally breathtaking Calle Sagárnaga between
Santa Cruz and Tamayo, and spreads out along adjoining streets. Here,
ARTS & CRAFTS
you’ll also find Calle Linares, an alley chock-a-block with artisans’ stores.
Some stores specialize in oriente woodcarvings and ceramics, and Potosí
silver. Others deal in rugs, wall-hangings, woven belts and pouches. Amid
the lovely weavings and other items of exquisite craftsmanship, you’ll find
plenty of tourist kitsch, an art form unto itself: Inca-themed ashtrays, fake
Tiwanaku figurines, costume jewelry and mass-produced woolens. Music
recordings are available in small stores along Valle Evaristo and more
established places on Linares. Or you can try your luck in the Mercado de
Hechicería where there are figurines and Aymará good-luck charms,
including frogs.
For less expensive llama or alpaca sweaters, bowler hats and other nontourist clothing items, stroll Calles Graneros and Max Paredes. Reflecting its
status as the more upmarket area, Zona Sur opts for designer clothing;
several stores sell stunning llama and alpaca fashion items. The Montenegro
area is especially good for shopping.
Many La Paz artisans specialize in traditional woodwind instruments such
as quenas, zampoñas, tarkas and pinquillos. Several shops sell instruments
along Sagárnaga, Linares and Illampu. Be aware, though, that there’s a lot of
low-quality or merely decorative tourist rubbish around.
For the few photographers who use slide and/or print films nowadays,
these are available in some camera shops; be cautious about buying film at
street markets where it is exposed to strong sun all day. Many photo shops
cluster around Plaza Venezuela (El Prado); some of these do digital
processing.
For all kinds of backpack protection – plastic sacks, chains, padlocks etc –
check the street stalls along Calle Isaac Tamayo.
Artesanía Sorata
Offline map Google map
(www.artesaniasorata.com; Sagárnaga 363) A community-focused project
that specializes in export-quality handmade dolls, original alpaca products
and other beautiful items.
DANGERS, ANNOYANCES & COMMON
SENSE
La Paz is not a safe city, especially at night. For years we’ve been saying that crime in Bolivia is
no worse than in large US cities. Today, this is no longer true, and travelers should exercise
caution while in La Paz. A little common sense goes a long way.
Simple Rules to Keep You Safe
Travel in groups, take cabs after 8pm (make sure it’s a radio taxi with a bubble on top), don’t
walk down dark alleys, carry small amounts of cash, and leave the fancy jewelry and iPods at
home or in the hotel safe. Also remember that you likely don’t know anybody in Bolivia. It’s sad
to say, but you should be wary of strangers here.
What’s Happening?
Fake police officers and bogus tourist officials exist. Note: authentic police officers will always
be uniformed (undercover police are under strict orders not to hassle foreigners) and will never
insist that you show them your passport, get in a taxi with them or allow them to search you in
public. If confronted by an imposter, refuse to show them your valuables (wallet, passport, money
etc), or insist on going to the nearest police station on foot. If physically threatened, it is always
best to hand over valuables immediately.
In the last few years there have been many incidents of ‘express kidnappings’ by taxi drivers,
where the driver and his accomplices (who board later or jump out from the trunk) kidnap you
and beat you until you provide your ATM PIN details. The best way to prevent express
kidnappings is to take a radio cab; these have a radio in the car and a promo bubble on the roof
(do not take the informal cabs which merely have a ‘taxi’ sticker). At night, ask the restaurant or
hotel to call a cab – the cab’s details are recorded at a central base. Don’t share cabs with
strangers and beware of accepting lifts from drivers who approach you (especially around dodgy
bus areas).
Violent attacks, including strangling victims and assault with weapons like clubs, is on the rise.
Petty theft and pickpocketing is not uncommon in restaurants, bus terminals, markets and
internet cafes. Keep a close eye on your stuff.
One popular scam involves someone spilling a substance on you or spitting a phlegm ball at
you. While you or they are wiping it off, another lifts your wallet or slashes your pack; the
perpetrator may be an ‘innocent’ granny or young girl. Similarly, make sure that you don’t bend
over to pick up a valuable item which has been ‘dropped.’ You risk being accused of theft, or of
being pickpocketed.
Where It’s Happening
It’s everywhere. The Sopocachi and the areas around Sagárnaga have especially high rates of
attacks on foreigners. You should avoid El Alto, the cemetery and higher-elevation
neighborhoods altogether at night. Use special caution in the bus terminals.
Other Concerns
La Paz is a great city to explore on foot, but take the local advice ‘ camina lento, toma poco…y
duerme solo ’ (walk slowly, drink little…and sleep by your lonesome) to avoid feeling the effects
ARTS & CRAFTS
ELECTRONICS
OUTDOOR EQUIPMENT
OUTDOOR EQUIPMENT, BOOKS
FOOD & DRINK
of soroche (altitude sickness). Soroche pills are said to be ineffective, and can even increase
altitude sickness. Acetaminophen (also known as Tylenol or paracetemol) does work, and
drinking lots of water helps, too.
In the last couple of years, it seems traffic has increased tenfold due in part to secondhand car
imports – take care in crossing roads and avoid walking in busy streets at peak hours when fumes
can be overwhelming.
Protests are not uncommon in La Paz, and they do sometimes turn violent. These center around
Plazas San Francisco and Murillo.
Comart Tukuypaj
Offline map Google map
(www.comart-tukuypaj.com; Linares 958, Rosario) Offers export-quality,
fair-trade llama, alpaca and artesanías from around the country. Upstairs the
Inca Pallay women’s weaving cooperative has a gallery with justly famous
Jal’qa and Candelaria weavings.
Kodak
Offline map Google map
( 211-7606; 16 de Julio s/n, Edificio Alameda) For camera fixes.
Tatoo
Offline map Google map
(Illampu 828) Part of a South American chain, this outdoor outlet has
climbing gear and name-brand outerwear.
Spitting Llama Bookstore & Outfitter
Offline map Google map
(www.thespittingllama.com; Linares 947) Inside Posada de la Abuela, this
friendly one-stop shop stocks everything from maps to gear, including tents,
backpacks and hiking boots.
El Ceibo
Offline map Google map
WINE
WINE
(www.elceibo.org; Potosí 1147) Chocoholics mustn’t miss El Ceibo, an
ecologically friendly producer of fantastic local chocolates.
Bodega La Concepción
Offline map Google map
(Cañada Strongest 1620, at Otero de la Vega, San Pedro) Award-winning,
high-altitude vintages are available at wholesale prices from this outlet of the
Tarija-based winery.
Campos de Solana/Casa Real
Offline map Google map
(Otero de la Vega 373, at 20 de Octubre) A Tarija winery best known for its
Malbec and Riesling.
Information
Emergency
Police ( 110)
Fire and ambulance ( 118)
Tourist police (Policía Turística; 800-140-071; Puerta 22, Plaza del
Estadio, Miraflores) Next to Disco Love City. English-speaking. Report
thefts to obtain a denuncia (affidavit) for insurance purposes – they won’t
recover any stolen goods. They also have a kiosk in front of the bus terminal.
Immigration
Migración Offline map Google map ( 211-0960; www.migracion.gob.bo;
Camacho 1468; 8:30am-4pm Mon-Fri) Some call this place ‘Migraineation’ but this is where you must obtain your visa extensions.
Internet Access
La Paz has nearly as many cybercafes as shoeshine boys. Charges range
from B$1 to B$3 an hour, and connections are generally fastest in the
morning or late evening. Many of the smarter cafes and most hotels now
have wi-fi access.
Laundry
Lavanderías (laundries) are the cheapest and most efficient way of ensuring
clean (and dry) clothes in La Paz. Higher-end hotels charge per piece (10
times the price), while budget digs may charge a fair per-kilo rate.
Calle Illampu, at the top of Sagárnaga, is lined with laundries. For quick,
reliable same-day machine-wash-and-dry service (B$7 to B$12 per kilo), try
the following options.
Lavandería Aroma Offline map Google map (Illampu 869, Rosario)
Lavandería Maya (Sagárnaga 339, Hostal Maya, Rosario) Laundry
service.
Offline map Google map
Laverap Offline map Google map (Aroma 730, Rosario)
Left Luggage
Most recommended sleeping places offer inexpensive or free left-luggage
storage, especially if you make a return reservation. The main bus terminal
has a cheap depósito (B$6 to B$8), but think twice about leaving anything
valuable here.
Maps
Free city maps are available at the tourist offices. Inside the central post
office, opposite the poste restante counter, there are gift shops that sell a
range of maps.
La Paz is the best place to stock up on maps for the rest of your trip.
Instituto Geográfico Militar Offline map Google map (IGM; Click here ; Juan
Pablo 23, Edificio Murillo, San Pedro; 8:30am-12:30pm & 2:30-6:30pm
Mon-Fri) IGM offers original 1:50,000 topographic maps (B$40) or
photocopies (B$35) if a sheet is unavailable.
Librería Olimpia Offline map Google map ( 240-8101; Mariscal Santa
Cruz, Galería Handal, Local 14) A stationery store that stocks a small but
worthwhile collection of maps.
Servicio Nacional de Áreas Protegidas (SERNAP; 242-6272;
www.sernap.gob.bo; Francisco Bedregal 2904, Sopocachi) Provides
information and maps of Bolivia’s 22 protected national areas.
Media
La Razón (www.la-razon.com), El Diario (www.eldiario.net) and La
Prensa (www.laprensa.com.bo) are La Paz’ major daily newspapers.
National media chains ATB (www.bolivia.com) and Grupo Fides
(www.radiofides.com) host the most up-to-date online news sites. Englishlanguage publications come and go. Bolivia Weekly
(www.boliviaweekly.com) is a good source for up-to-date English headlines.
Medical Services
For serious medical emergency conditions, contact your embassy for doctor
recommendations.
PHARMACIES
24-hour pharmacy (Farmacia 24 Horas; cnr Av 16 de Julio & Bueno;
24hr) A good pharmacy on the Prado.
MEDICAL CENTERS
Centro Epidemiológico Departamental La Paz (Centro Pilote; 245-
0166; Vásquez at Perú; 8:30-11:30am Mon-Fri) Anyone heading for
malarial areas can pick up antimalarials, and rabies and yellow fever
vaccinations, for the cost of a sterile needle – bring one from a pharmacy.
Clínica Alemana ( 432-521; Vásquez at Perú, Sopocachi; 24hr) Offers
German efficiency.
Clínica Sur ( 278-4001; Hernando Siles, Zona Sur) Emergency service.
High Altitude Pathology Institute ( 7325-8026, 224-5394;
www.altitudeclinic.com; Saavedra 2302, Miraflores) Bolivian member of the
International Association for Medical Assistance to Travelers (Iamat). Offers
computerized high-altitude medical checkups and can help with high-altitude
problems. English spoken.
Medicentro ( 243-2521; 6 de Agosto 2821, Prado; 24hr)
Recommended for general care.
Techno Vision ( 240-9637; Comercio 844) Glasses and eye care.
DOCTORS
Dr Elbert Orellana Jordan ( 7065-9743, 242-2342;
asistmedbolivia@hotmail.com) English speaker.
Dr Fernando Patiño ( 7724-3765; curare27@gmail.com; Edificio
Curare, Calle 10, 8090, cnr Julio C Paiño, Calacoto) English speaker.
Dr Iturri Stroobandt Igor ( 7195-8595, 221-876;
bolivianmedicine@latinmail.com) French and English speaker.
Money
ATMS
Cash withdrawals of bolivianos and US dollars are possible at numerous
ATMs at major intersections around the city. For cash advances (bolivianos
only, amount according to your limit in your home country) with no
commission and little hassle, try the Lonely Planet–listed options.
Banco Mercantil Offline map Google map (cnr Mercado & Ayacucho)
Banco Nacional de Bolivia Offline map Google map (cnr Colón & Camacho)
MONEY TRANSFERS
Try Western Union/DHL, which has outlets scattered all around town, for
urgent international money transfers.
MONEY CHANGERS
Casas de cambio (exchange offices) in the city center can be quicker and
more convenient than banks. Most places open from 8:30am to noon and
2pm to 6pm weekdays, and on Saturday mornings.
Be wary of counterfeit US dollars and bolivianos, especially with
cambistas (street money changers) who loiter around the intersections of
Colón, Camacho and Santa Cruz. Traveler’s checks can be virtually
impossible to change, except at money changers and banks.
Cambios América Offline map Google map (Camacho 1223, Casco Viejo)
Money-changing bureau.
Casa de Cambio Sudamer Offline map Google map (Colón 206 at Camacho,
Casco Viejo; 8:30am-6:30pm Mon-Fri, 9:30am-12:30pm Sat) Also has
MoneyGram service for money transfers.
Post
Many hotels now have post boxes.
Central post office (Ecobol; cnr Mariscal Santa Cruz & Oruro, Prado;
8am-8pm Mon-Fri, 8:30am-6pm Sat, 9am-noon Sun) Lista de correos (poste
restante) mail is held for two months for free here – bring your passport. A
downstairs customs desk facilitates international parcel posting.
Telephone
Convenient puntos (privately run phone offices) of various carriers – Entel,
Cotel, Tigo, Viva etc – are scattered throughout the city, and some mobile
services now have wandering salesmen who will allow you to make a call
from their mobile phone. Street kiosks, which are on nearly every corner,
also sell phone cards, and offer brief local calls for about B$1 per minute.
You can buy cell phone sim cards (known as chips) for about B$10 from
Entel or any carrier outlet. International calls can be made at low prices from
the International call center (Galería Chuquiago, cnr Sagárnaga &
Murillo; 8:30am-8pm).
Entel (Ayacucho 267, Casco Viejo; 8:30am-9pm Mon-Fri, to 8:30pm Sat,
9am-4pm Sun) The main Entel office is the best place to receive incoming
calls and faxes.
Tourist Information
Information kiosks (Main bus terminal) Opening hours vary. The kiosks
have maps and may help you find a hotel.
InfoTur Offline map Google map ( 265-1778; www.visitbolivia.org; cnr Av
Mariscal Santa Cruz & Colombia, Prado; 8:30am-7pm Mon-Fri,
9:30am-1pm Sat & Sun) Stop by to grab some maps and get detailed
information. English is spoken by some staff.
Getting There & Away
Air
El Alto International Airport (LPB) is 10km via toll road from the city
center on the Altiplano. At 4050m, it’s the world’s highest international
airport; larger planes need 5km of runway to lift off and must land at twice
their sea-level velocity to compensate for the lower atmospheric density.
Stopping distance is much greater too, and planes are equipped with special
tires to withstand the extreme forces involved.
Airport services include oxygen tanks in the international arrivals area,
newsstand, ATMs, internet, souvenir stores, a bookstore, a coffee shop, fast
food, a bistro and a duty-free shop in the international terminal. The
currency-exchange desk outside the international arrivals area gives poor
rates on traveler’s checks – if possible, wait until you’re in town. The
domestic departure tax is B$15, while the international departure tax is
US$25 (payable in cash only in the airport lobby).
Times and schedules for flights change often. Check your airline’s website
or call.
AIRLINES
Aerocon ( in Santa Cruz 3-351-1010; www.aerocon.bo) Flights to
Cochabamba, Guayamerín, Riberalta, Rurrenabaque, Santa Ana, Santa Cruz,
Sucre, Tarija, Trinidad and Yacuiba.
Amaszonas ( 222-0848; www.amaszonas.com) Daily flights to Cuzco,
Rurrenabaque, Santa Cruz, Tarija, Trinidad and Uyuni.
American Airlines ( 235-1360; www.aa.com; Calle 18, Calacoto)
International.
Boliviana de Aviación (BOA; 901-10-5010; www.boa.bo) Flights to
Buenos Aires, Cobija, Cochabamba, Sucre, Santa Cruz, Sao Paolo and
Tarija.
Lan Airlines Offline map Google map ( 235-8377; www.lan.com; 16 de Julio
156, Suite 104, Edificio Ayacucho, Prado) International
Taca Offline map Google map ( 215-8202; www.taca.com; 16 de Julio 1616,
Edificio Petrolero, Prado) International.
TAM Mercosur Offline map Google map ( 244-3442; Gutiérrez 2323)
Transporte Aéreos Militares Offline map Google map (TAM; Click here ;
268-1111; www.tam.bo; Ismael Montes 738, Prado) Flights to Cobija,
Cochabamba, Guayamerín, Puerto Suárez, Riberalta, Rurrenabaque, Santa
Cruz, Sucre, Tarija, Trinidad, Yacuiba, Ixiamas and Uyuni.
Bus
La Paz has three bus terminals/bus areas. You can use the main bus terminal
for most national and international destinations. If you are going to the
Yungas or Amazon, you’ll need go to Villa Fátima. For Sorata, Titicaca and
Tiwanaku, head to the cemetery. Most national destinations are serviced
hourly for major cities and daily for less visited spots. International
departures generally leave once a week – check ahead as schedules change.
You can get to all the bus areas by micros, but radio taxis are recommended
for your safety.
Bolivia en Tus Manos (www.boliviaentusmanos.com/terminal) Up-to-date
information on buses from La Paz.
Cemetery (Baptista) Offers cheap buses to Tiwanaku, Titicaca and Sorata
(via Desaguadero). This area is especially hairy at night, and you should
watch your bags while boarding.
Main bus terminal (Terminal de Buses; Plaza Antofagasta) This services
all national destinations South and East of Paz, as well as international
destinations. It is a 15-minute uphill walk north of the city center. Fares are
relatively uniform between companies. The station was designed by Gustave
Eiffel.
Villa Fátima (Tejada Sorzano) Services Coroico and other Yungas and
Amazon destinations, mostly via micros. It’s about 1km uphill from Plaza
Gualberto Villarroel. There’s no central station, so ask around to find the
buses servicing your particular destination. Offices on Yanacachi by an old
gas station service Coroico, on Las Americas, also by a gas station, service
the Amazon Basin, and on San Jorge, service Chulumani. There are more
operations clustered along Virgen del Carmen, just west of Av Las Américas.
BUS COSTS & DISTANCES
From Main Terminal
DESTINATION COST (B$) DURATION (HR)
Arica 130 8
Buenos Aires 650 48–50
Copacabana 35 3–4
Cochabamba 43–90 7–8
Cusco 130 12–17
Iquique 150 11–13
Lima 500–600 27
Oruro 23–60 3.5
Potosi 52–110 8
Puno 100 8
Santa Cruz (new road) 85–170 17
Santa Cruz (old road) 95–180 20
Sucre 69–135 14
Tarija 115–215 24
Tupiza 90 20
Uyuni 72–155 10
Villazón 90–200 23
From Villa Fátima
DESTINATION COST (B$) DURATION (HR)
Caranavi 15–25 8
Chulumani 20 4
Coroico 20–30 3
Cumbre 20 1
Rurrenabaque 120 18–20
Yolosita 20 3
From Cemetery
DESTINATION COST (B$) DURATION (HR)
Copacabana 15 3
Desaguadero 15 2
Huarina (for Cordillera Apolobamba) 10 3
Sorata 17 5
Tiwanaku 6–15 1.5
TOURIST SERVICES FROM MAIN TERMINAL
Tourist services to Copacabana, Puno (book with La Paz tour agencies),
Tiwanaku, Uyuni and Valle de la Luna cut down on risk and up your
comfort.
Diana Tours Offline map Google map (www.diana-tours.com; Main Terminal;
B$60) Round-trip guided trips to Valle de la Luna, leaving at 8:30am.
Nuevo Continente (Main Terminal; B$60) Round-trip guided trips to
Tiwanaku, leaving at 9am and returning at 4pm.
Todo Turismo (www.todoturismo.bo; Main Terminal; B$230) Overnight
direct buses to Uyuni leaving at 9pm (10 hours).
Train
La Paz’ old train station is defunct, but they are experimenting with a tourist
service to Tiwanaku from El Alto. Trains for Chile and the Argentine border,
via Uyuni and/or Tupiza, all leave from Oruro. For information and
bookings, contact the Empresa Ferroviaria Andina (www.fca.com.bo). For
information about rail services within Peru, contact Peru Rail
(www.perurail.com).
Getting Around
To/From the Airport
There are two access routes to El Alto International Airport: the autopista
toll road (B$3), and the sinuous free route, which leads into Plaza Ballivián
in El Alto.
Minibus 212 runs frequently between Plaza Isabel la Católica and the
airport between around 7am and 8pm. Heading into town from the airport,
this service will drop you anywhere along the Prado.
Radio taxis (around B$50 for up to four passengers) will pick you up at
your door; confirm the price with the dispatcher when booking, or ask the
driver to verify it when you climb in. For a fifth person, there is an
additional B$10 charge. Transportes Aéreos Militares (TAM) flights leave
from the military airport ( 212-1585, 237-9286) in El Alto. Catch a Río
Seco micro from the upper Prado. Taxi fares should be about the same as for
the main El Alto airport.
Car & Motorcycle
Driving the steep, winding, frenetic one-way streets of La Paz may be
intimidating for the uninitiated, but for longer day trips into the immediate
hinterlands, you could consider renting a car (but hiring a driver is probably
easier and just as economical; for more information see the Transport
chapter, Click here ).
Avis ( 211-1870; www.avis.com.bo; cnr Av Costanera & Calle 20, Zona
Sur)
Budget Offline map Google map ( 241-8768; www.budget.bo; Fernando
Guachalla 639) Also a branch at the airport. Watch for unexpected extra
expenses, like car washes.
Kolla Motors Offline map Google map ( 241-9141; www.kollamotors.com;
Rosendo Gutiérrez 502)
Public Transportation
MICRO & MINIBUS
La Paz’ sputtering and smoke-spewing micros, the older three-quarter-sized
buses, charge about B$2 per trip. Minibuses service most places as well, for
a slightly higher cost. In addition to a route number or letter, micros plainly
display their destination and route on a signboard posted in the front
window. Minibuses usually have a young tout screaming the stops. Wave to
catch the bus. They stop at signed paradas (official stops), or, if the cops
aren’t watching, whenever you wave them down.
TRUFI
Trufis are shared cars or minibuses that ply set routes. Destinations are
identified on placards on the roof or windscreen. They charge approximately
B$3 around town and B$4 to Zona Sur.
TAXI
Radio taxis (with roof bubbles advertising their telephone numbers) are
recommended. They charge about B$10 around the center, B$12 to B$14
(more in peak hours) from Sagárnaga to Sopocachi or Sopocachi to the
cemetery district, and B$15 to B$20 to Zona Sur. Charges are a little higher
after 11pm. Normal taxi services (with just a taxi sign, no phone number and
no bubble) work as collective cabs, charging each passenger around B$6;
note, thought, that they are known for express kidnappings (see boxed text,
Click here ).
If possible, ask your hotel or restaurant to ring for a taxi. Otherwise, taxis
can be waved down anywhere, except near intersections or in areas cordoned
off by the police. Always confirm the fare before you leave.
AROUND LA PAZ
Valle de la Luna
About 10km down the canyon of the Río Choqueyapu from the city center,
Valle de la Luna is a slightly overhyped place, though it’s a pleasant break
from urban La Paz. It’s the most accessible hiking spot near the city, with
signed trails and regular patrols. It could be easily visited in a morning or
combined with another outing such as a hike to Muela del Diablo to fill an
entire day. It actually isn’t a valley at all, but a bizarre, eroded hillside maze
of canyons and pinnacles technically known as badlands. Several species of
cactus grow here, including the hallucinogenic choma (San Pedro cactus).
Unfortunately, urban growth has caught up to the area, making it less of a
viewpoint than it otherwise might have been. On your way here, take a pitstop at the Sendero del Aguila, a 1.7km trail just up from the Rio Selva
hotel.
Be aware that while they are upping patrols, robberies have been reported
here. Travel in groups.
Getting There & Away
Diana Tours ( Click here ) offers round-trip guided trips to Valle de la Luna,
leaving at 8:30am from the main bus terminal in La Paz. If on your own,
from Av México in La Paz, which parallels the Prado, catch any form of
transportation marked ‘Mallasa’ or ‘Zoológico.’ These will drop you off
several meters from the entrance.
For a taxi from the center of La Paz, you’ll pay around B$80 for up to
three people, and the driver may wait for an hour or so while you look
around.
Mallasa
The village of Mallasa is popular among paceños (people from La Paz) on
weekends. Just east of Mallasa is La Paz’ spacious, but sorely underfunded,
Vesty Pakos Zoo (admission B$3.50; 10am-5pm). Animal lovers may be
upset by the poor conditions, however.
From the overlook immediately behind the zoo, you can take the clearly
marked walking track that descends to and crosses the fetid Río
Choqueyapu, before beginning a lung-bursting 600m climb to the Muela del
Diablo.
To get to Mallasa from La Paz, take minibus 231 from Sagárnaga, or any
form of transportation marked ‘Mallasa’ or ‘Zoológico.’ From the top of
Valle de la Luna, catch a micro heading downvalley or continue a couple of
kilometers on foot to Mallasa.
Valencia & Mecapaca
About 30km south of La Paz, and 15km from Mallasa, are two quaint, if
increasingly urbanized, villages worth visiting for their authenticity and
beautiful landscapes. Mecapaca boasts a beautifully restored church in its
plaza (ask for Sra Ninfa Avendaño for keys; if you buy something from her
store and add a donation to the church box, she’ll likely oblige). The church
is perched on the hillside of the small plaza with wonderful views of the
fertile valley beyond. On the plaza, there are two small super-simple
restaurants for lunch (mains B$15).
A great treat on the way back to La Paz is to stop for an Italian meal at
Trattoria Sant’ Aquilina ( weekends only), a Greek island– style
restaurant, just before or after Jupapina, depending which direction you are
coming from. The restaurant is renowned for its wood-fired pizza and gelato,
and it’s popular among the trendy paceñan crowds who converge on
Sundays. If this doesn’t take your fancy, join the paceñans at a number of
other weekend eateries that have sprung up along the increasingly urbanized
road south of La Paz.
Take minibus 253 to Mecapaca/Valencia from Plaza Belso in San Pedro
(B$4) or from Mallasa. To return to La Paz take the same minibus 253 from
Mecapaca; from anywhere else, catch anything that moves back up the
valley. On weekends, trufis, minibuses and radio taxis leave constantly from
Plaza Humboldt (Zona Sur) for points south.
Muela del Diablo
The prominent rock outcrop known as the Devil’s Molar is actually an
extinct volcanic plug that rises between the Río Choqueyapu and the
suburban sprawl of Pedregal and Calacoto. A hike to its base makes a
pleasant – and easy to take on – half-day walking trip from La Paz; it offers
incredible views of the city and valley of La Paz, and can be easily
combined with a visit to Valle de la Luna.
From the cemetery in Pedregal, the trail climbs steeply (several times
crossing the new road that provides access to the hamlet near the base of the
muela). After a breathless hour or so, you’ll reach a pleasant grassy swale
where the ‘tooth’ comes into view, as well as some precarious pinnacles
further east.
At this point the walking track joins the road and descends through the
hamlet. About 300m further along, a side route branches off to the left and
climbs toward the base of the muela. From the end of this route you can pick
your way with extreme caution up to the cleft between the double summit,
where there’s a large cross. Without technical equipment and expertise,
however, it’s inadvisable to climb further.
After descending to the main track, you can decide whether to return the
way you came, or follow the steep track that circles the muela in a
counterclockwise direction and descends to the Río Choqueyapu before
climbing the other side of the valley to the zoo in Mallasa. The latter option
will turn this hike into a full-day trip, as it takes about six hours for the hike
between Pedregal and Mallasa.
Be aware that several robberies have been reported here; inquire locally
about safety before heading out and travel in pairs or groups, or with a local
guide.
Getting There & Away
From La Paz the best access to the start of the hike is on minibus 288,
marked ‘Pedregal,’ from the lower Prado. The end of the line is the parking
area a couple of hundred meters downhill from Pedregal’s cemetery.
Returning from Valle de la Luna, you can board these minibuses at Zona
Sur’s Plaza Humboldt or follow the difficult walking track from near the zoo
in Mallasa, which involves a descent to the Río Choqueyapu and then a stiff
600m ascent to the eastern side of the muela. To return to La Paz from
Pedregal, catch a ‘Prado’ minibus from the parking area.
RÍO CHOKE
The Río Choqueyapu, which flows underground through La Paz and opens up in the Zona Sur,
might as well be shortened to the Río Choke. It’s the most contaminated river in all of Bolivia,
containing high levels of industrial waste, urine, garbage and excrement. The industrial toxins
include cyanide from tanneries and a cocktail of chemicals and dyes from textile and paper
industries, which cause the river to flow bright orange in places, or red topped with a layer of
white foam. The river also receives about a ton of heavy metals a day from upstream mines,
according to the news outlets El Diario and Gaia Noticias. Despite recently passed
environmental protection laws, most of the contamination comes from illegal industrial dumping.
Further downstream, the water is used by campesinos for washing, consumption and
agriculture. Most people heat the water before drinking it, but few boil it, and even boiling
wouldn’t eliminate some of the chemical pollutants from industrial wastes. Several years ago
there was an outbreak of cholera in La Paz, prompting people to blame the campesinos in a
nearby valley, who grow vegetables in the fertile valley.
Valle de las Ánimas
The name Valley of Spirits is used to describe the eerily eroded canyons and
fantastic organ-pipe spires to the north and northeast of the barrios of
Chasquipampa, Ovejuyo and Apaña (which are rapidly being absorbed into
the Zona Sur neighborhoods of La Paz). The scenery resembles that of Valle
de la Luna, but on a grander scale. It’s worth just getting out here.
There are two (long-day) walking routes through the valley: the Río
Ovejuyo Route and the Quebrada Negra Route. The Río Ovejuyo Route
requires a compass and 1:50,000 topography sheet 5944-II and, for a very
short section, topo sheet 5944-I. This option can be challenging, especially
because of the altitude. Make sure you carry plenty of water, a hat and
snacks.
The Quebrada Negra Route heads up Quebrada Negra, over Cerro
Pararani and down to Huni. Although only 7km, it’s a demanding day hike
that requires six to seven hours. It begins at the Quebrada Negra ravine,
which crosses the road at the upper (eastern) end of Ovejuyo village.
The easy-to-follow 4km route up Quebrada Negra will take you through
the most dramatic stretches of the eroded Valle de las Ánimas pinnacles.
Near the head of the ravine, you need to traverse southeast around the
northern shoulder of Cerro Pararani, until you find the obvious route that
descends steeply to Huni village (not Huni chapel, which is also marked on
topo sheets). In fine weather you’ll have good views of Illimani along this
section. For this route you’ll need a compass and the 1:50,000 topo sheets
5944-I and 6044-III. To return to La Paz, follow the road for 2km up over
Paso Huni and then for another 1.5km downhill to Apaña, where you’ll catch
up with regular micros and trufis returning to the city.
Getting There & Away
To get here, take minibus 42 (it must also say Uni) from Plaza Humboldt in
Zona Sur. Ask the driver to drop you here.
Cañón de Palca
The magnificent Palca Canyon (marked on topo sheets as Quebrada Chua
Kheri) brings a slice of Grand Canyon country to the dramatic badland peaks
and eroded amphitheaters east of La Paz. A walk through this gorge makes
an ideal day hike from La Paz. Note: go only in groups as assaults on single
hikers at the time of research have been reported here. Check the safety
status before setting out.
A good, safe alternative is to head out with La Paz on Foot ( Click here ),
which offers excellent guided day hikes through the canyon (US$45 per
person including transportation and lunch).
Sleeping & Eating
Palca is a pleasant, basic town located relatively close to the exit of the
canyon. It has a simple hostal (r per person B$20-40), which offers set
meals and is popular with Bolivian tourists on weekends. Alternatively, you
can camp around Palca or nearby Ventilla. Beware of the badly polluted
surface water, and ask permission before you set your tent up in a field or
pasture.
Huni is a small town above the entrance to Cañón de Palca. It has a store
selling basic supplies, including bottled water and snack foods, and also
provides Bolivian set-menu meals at lunchtime.
Getting There & Away
For the start of this hike, you need to reach Huni, which is served only by
micros and trufis heading for Ventilla and Palca. These leave at least once
daily from near the corner of Boquerón and Lara, two blocks north of Plaza
Líbano in the San Pedro district of La Paz. There’s no set schedule, but most
leave in the morning – be there by 7am. You’ll have the best luck on
Saturday and Sunday, when families make excursions into the countryside.
Alternatively, take micro 42 or minibus 385, marked ‘Ovejuyo/Apaña,’ get
off at the end of the line, and slog the 1.5km up the road to Paso Huni.
From Palca back to La Paz, you’ll find occasional camiones, micros and
minibuses, particularly on Sunday afternoon, but don’t count on anything
after 3pm or 4pm. Alternatively, you can hike to Ventilla, an hour uphill
through a pleasant eucalyptus plantation, and try hitchhiking from there.
If you arrive in Palca geared up for more hiking, you can always set off
from Ventilla along the Takesi trek.
Chacaltaya
The 5395m-high Cerro Chacaltaya peak atop a former glacier (it diminished
over several decades and, tragically, had melted completely by 2009), is a
popular day trip. Until the ‘big melt,’ it was the world’s highest ‘developed’
ski area. It’s a steep 90-minute ride from central La Paz, and the accessible
summit is an easy 200m ascent from there.
You can get your thrills, spills (well, hopefully not) and great views on a
60km-plus mountain-bike trip from Chacaltaya to Zongo and beyond at
descents of up to 4100m (vertical drop). La Paz bike outfitters run trips for
around B$800 per person.
For visitors and hikers, Chacaltaya offers spectacular views of La Paz,
Illimani, Mururata and 6088m Huayna Potosí. It’s a high-altitude, relatively
easy (but steep) 100m or so climb from the lodge to the summit of
Chacaltaya. Remember to carry warm clothing and water, and take plenty of
rests – say, a 30-second stop every 10 steps or so, and longer stops if needed
– even if you don’t feel tired. If you start to feel light-headed, sit down and
rest until the feeling passes. If it doesn’t, you may be suffering from mild
altitude sickness; the only remedy is to descend.
From Chacaltaya it’s possible to walk to Refugio Huayna Potosí, at the
base of Huayna Potosí, in half a day. Before you set out, you must obtain
maps from Instituto Geográfico Militar ( Click here ) and instructions.
If it’s open, snacks and hot drinks are available at Club Andino’s lodge; if
you want anything more substantial, bring it from town. Also bring warm
(and windproof) clothing, sunglasses (100% UV proof) and sunscreen.
For overnight stays at Chacaltaya, you can crash in Club Andino’s ski
lodge, a ’50s-style stone ski lodge. A warm sleeping bag, food and lots of
water are essential for an overnight stay.
Those who fly into La Paz from the lowlands will want to wait a few days
before visiting Chacaltaya or other high-altitude places.
Getting There & Away
There’s no public transportation to Chacaltaya. Most La Paz tour agencies
take groups to Chacaltaya for around B$50 to B$80 per person.
Tiwanaku
While it’s no Machu Picchu or Tikal, a visit to the ruins of Tiwanaku
(sometimes spelled Tiahuanaco or Tihuanaco) makes for a good day trip
from La Paz. The site itself is less than outstanding, with a few carved
monoliths, archways and arcades, and a decent museum, but history buffs
will love diving into the myths and mysteries of this lost civilization. In the
eponymous village, there are a number of hotels, restaurants, a fun little
plaza with excellent sculptures inspired by Tiwanaku styles and a 16thcentury church, built, no doubt, with stones from the Tiwanaku site.
Little is actually known about the people who constructed the ceremonial
center on the southern shore of Lake Titicaca more than a thousand years
ago. Archaeologists generally agree that the civilization that spawned
Tiwanaku rose around 600 BC. Construction on the ceremonial site was
under way by about AD 700, but around 1200 the group had melted into
obscurity, becoming another ‘lost’ civilization. Evidence of its influence,
particularly its religion, has been found throughout the vast area that later
became the Inca empire.
The treasures of Tiwanaku have literally been scattered to the four corners
of the earth. Its gold was looted by the Spanish, and early stone and pottery
finds were sometimes destroyed by religious zealots who considered them
pagan idols. Some of the work found its way to European museums; farmers
destroyed pieces of it as they turned the surrounding area into pasture and
cropland; the Church kept some of the statues or sold them as curios; and the
larger stonework went into Spanish construction projects, and even into the
bed of the La Paz–Guaqui rail line that passes just south of the site.
Fortunately, a portion of the treasure has been preserved, and some of it
remains in Bolivia. A few of the larger anthropomorphic stone statues have
been left on the site, and the onsite museum has a decent collection of
pottery and other objects. Others are on display at the Museo Nacional de
Arqueología ( Click here ) in La Paz.
History
Although no one is certain whether it was the capital of a nation, Tiwanaku
undoubtedly served as a great ceremonial center. At its height the city had a
population of 20,000 inhabitants and encompassed approximately 2.6 sq km.
Some say the name roughly translates to ‘the dry coast’ or ‘stone in the
center,’ and the 3870m (12,696 ft) city most likely sat on the edge of Lake
Titicaca, serving as the ceremonial center for the regions south of the lake.
While only 30 percent of the original site has been excavated – and what
remains is less than overwhelming – the Tiwanaku culture made great
advances in architecture, math and astronomy well before the Inca
ascendancy.
Archaeologists divide the development of the Tiwanaku into five distinct
periods, numbered Tiwanaku I through V, each of which has its own
outstanding attributes.
The Tiwanaku I period falls between the advent of the Tiwanaku
civilization and the middle of the 5th century BC. Significant finds from this
period include multicolored pottery and human or animal effigies in painted
clay. Tiwanaku II, which ended around the beginning of the Christian era, is
hallmarked by ceramic vessels with horizontal handles. Tiwanaku III
dominated the next 300 years, and was characterized by tricolor pottery of
geometric design, often decorated with images of stylized animals.
Tiwanaku IV, also known as the Classic Period, developed between AD
300 and 700. The large stone structures that dominate the site today were
constructed during this period. The use of bronze and gold is considered
evidence of contact with groups further east in the Cochabamba valley and
further west on the Peruvian coast. Tiwanaku IV pottery is largely
anthropomorphic. Pieces uncovered by archaeologists include some in the
shape of human heads and faces with bulging cheeks, indicating that the
coca leaf was already in use at this time.
Tiwanaku V, also called the Expansive Period, is marked by a decline that
lasted until Tiwanaku’s population completely disappeared around 1200.
Were they the victims of war, famine, climate change or alien abductions?
Nobody knows, though most archaeologists point to climate change as the
most likely cause of the civilization’s rapid decline. During this period
pottery grew less elaborate, construction projects slowed and stopped, and
no large-scale monuments were added after the early phases of this period.
When the Spaniards arrived in South America, local indigenous legends
recounted that Tiwanaku had been the capital of the bearded, white god-king
called Viracocha, and that from his city Viracocha had reigned over the
civilization.
Pieces from the three more recent Tiwanaku periods may be found
scattered around Bolivia, but the majority are housed in archaeological
museums in La Paz and Cochabamba. The ruins themselves have been so
badly looted, however, that much of the information they could have
revealed about their builders is now lost forever.
At the request of Unesco, they ceased excavations of the site in 2005, and
are concentrating now on preserving what they’ve already dug up. About
100,000 visitors come to the site every year.
Sights & Activities
Entrance to the site and museum (B$80; tickets 9am to 4pm, site open until
5pm) is paid opposite the visitor’s center. If you go on your own, start your
visit in the museum to get a basic understanding of the history, then head to
the ruins.
The true star of the show at the onsite museum, Museo Litico
Monumental, is the massive 7.3m Monolito Bennett Pachamama, rescued
in 2002 from its former smoggy home at the outdoor Templete
Semisubterráneo ( Click here ) in La Paz. You’ll also find a basic collection
of artifacts, pottery, exhibits on the practice of cranial deformation, and other
items dug up on the site here. Labeling is in Spanish. Much of the collection
is currently mothballed, as the roof of the recently built museum is already
collapsing.
Scattered around the Tiwanaku site, you’ll find heaps of jumbled basalt
and sandstone slabs weighing as much as 25 tons each. Oddly enough, the
nearest quarries that could have produced the basalt megaliths are on the
Copacabana peninsula, 40km away beyond the lake. Even the sandstone
blocks had to be transported from a site more than 5km away. It’s no
wonder, then, that when the Spanish asked local Aymará how the buildings
were constructed, they replied that it was done with the aid of the
leader/deity Viracocha. They could conceive of no other plausible
explanation.
At the entrance to the site two stone blocks can be used as megaphones.
After entertaining yourself for a minute or two with this interesting preColumbian, pre-iPod technology, climb the hill up to Tiwanaku’s most
outstanding structure, the partially excavated Akapana pyramid, which was
built on an existing geological formation. At its base this roughly square
16m hill covers a surface area of about 200 sq meters. In the center of its flat
summit is an oval-shaped sunken area, which some sources attribute to early,
haphazard, Spanish excavation. The presence of a stone drain in the center,
however, has led some archaeologists to believe it was used for water
storage. In the past few years, though, archaeologists have changed their
minds. Recent findings include craniums, assumed to be war trophies,
leading archaeologists to believe the pyramid was, in fact, a ceremonial
temple.
North of the pyramid is Kalasasaya, a partially reconstructed 130m-by120m ritual-platform compound with walls constructed of huge blocks of red
sandstone and andesite. The blocks are precisely fitted to form a platform
base 3m high. Monolithic uprights flank the massive entrance steps up to the
restored portico of the enclosure, beyond which is an interior courtyard and
the ruins of priests’ quarters. Note the size of the top stair – a massive single
block. The Monolito Ponce monolith, with his turban (no doubt covering up
his deformed cranium), mask, ceremonial vase and walking stick, sits at the
center of the first platform. Some say the stick and the vase are symbolic of
the dualism of Andean culture (nature versus nurture).
Other stairways lead to secondary platforms, where there are other
monoliths including the famous El Fraile (priest). At the far northwest
corner of Kalasasaya is Tiwanaku’s best-known structure, the Puerta del Sol
(Gateway of the Sun). This megalithic gateway was carved from a single
block of andesite, and archaeologists assume that it was associated in some
way with the sun deity. The surface of this fine-grained, gray volcanic rock
is ornamented with low-relief designs on one side and a row of four deep
niches on the other. The gateway was most likely originally located in the
center of Kalasasaya Platform and was used as a calendar, with the sun
striking specific figures on the solstice and equinox. The structure is
estimated to weigh at least 44 tons.
There’s a smaller, similar gateway carved with zoomorphic designs near
the western end of the site that is informally known as the Puerta de la
Luna (Gateway of the Moon).
East of the main entrance to Kalasasaya, a stairway leads down into the
Templete Semisubterráneo, an acoustic, red sandstone pit structure
measuring 26m by 28m, with a rectangular sunken courtyard and walls
adorned with 175 crudely carved stone faces. In the 1960s archaeologists
tried to rebuild these and used cement between the stones.
West of Kalasasaya is a 55m-by-60m rectangular area known as Putuni or
Palacio de los Sarcófagos (The Palace of the Sarcophagi). It is surrounded
by double walls and you can see the foundations of several tombs. About
90% of the artifacts collected by amateur enthusiast Fritz Buck in the early
20th century from these tombs are found in La Paz’ Museo de Metales
Preciosos ( Click here ).
The heap of rubble at the eastern end of the site is known as Kantatayita.
Archaeologists are still trying to deduce some sort of meaningful plan from
these well-carved slabs; one elaborately decorated lintel and some larger
stone blocks bearing intriguing geometric designs are the only available
clues. It has been postulated – and dubiously ‘proven’ – that they were
derived from universal mathematical constants, such as pi, but some
archaeologists simply see the plans for a large and well-designed building.
Across the railway line southwest of the Tiwanaku site, you’ll see the
excavation site of Puma Punku (Gateway of the Puma). In this temple area
megaliths weighing more than 130 tons have been discovered. Like
Kalasasaya and Akapana, there is evidence that Puma Punku was begun with
one type of material and finished with another; part was constructed of
enormous sandstone blocks and, during a later phase of construction,
notched and jointed basalt blocks were added.
Note also, in the distance of the site’s northern boundary, the sukakollo, a
highly sophisticated system of terraced irrigation.
Tours
Guided tours ( 7524-3141; tiwanakuguias_turismo@hotmail.com; B$80
for 1-6 people) are available in English and Spanish, and are highly
recommended.
Festivals & Events
HOTEL
HOTEL
BOLIVIAN
On June 21 (the southern hemisphere’s winter solstice), when the rays of the
rising sun shine through the temple entrance on the eastern side of the
complex, the Aymará New Year (Machaq Mara) is celebrated at Tiwanaku.
As many as 5000 people, including a large contingent of New Agers, arrive
from all over the world. Locals don colorful ceremonial dress and visitors
are invited to join the party, drink singani (alcoholic spirit), chew coca,
sacrifice llamas and dance until dawn. Artisans hold a crafts fair to coincide
with this annual celebration.
Special buses leave La Paz around 4am to arrive in time for sunrise. Dress
warmly because the pre-dawn hours are bitterly cold at this time of year.
Smaller, traditional, less tourist-oriented celebrations are held here for the
other solstice and equinoxes.
Sleeping & Eating
You’ll find several basic eateries near the ruins. Tiwanaku village, 1km west
of the ruins, has several marginal restaurants and an incredibly colorful
Sunday market.
Gran Hotel Tiahuanacu $$
( 289-8548; www.tijuanacumystical.com; Bolívar 903; s/d incl breakfast
B$120/240, s without bathroom incl breakfast B$60) Three blocks east of the
Plaza, this is the nicest place to stay, with rooms that are clean, breezy and
comfortable. There’s a restaurant open daily. We only wish there were better
views of the ruins.
Hotel Akapana $
( 289-5104; www.hotelakapana; Ferrocarril; s/d incl breakfast B$80/150)
Just 100m west of the site, this friendly hotel has three levels, simple rooms
with good views, hot water 24 hours a day, and a top-floor mirador with
amazing views of the neighboring site.
Restaurante Cabaña del Puma $$
(Ferrocarril; mains B$45-70; ) Next to the ruin entrance, this clean eatery
offers basic country food, like trout and chicken. A vegetarian meal comes
with veggies, potatoes and country cheese.
Getting There & Away
Many La Paz agencies offer reasonably priced, guided, full- and half-day
Tiwanaku tours (B$70 to B$140 per person), including transportation and a
bilingual guide. These tours are well worth it for the convenience; most
travelers visit Tiwanaku this way.
Nuevo Continente (Main Terminal; B$60) has round-trip guided trips to
Tiwanaku, leaving at 9am and returning at 4pm from La Paz’ main terminal.
For those who prefer to go it alone, buses from La Paz’ cemetery leave
every hour and cost from B$6 to B$15.
Minibuses, which are often crowded, pass the museum near the entrance
to the complex. To return to La Paz, catch a minibus from the village’s main
plaza. Make sure it says Cemetario, otherwise, you’ll get dropped off in El
Alto’s Ceja. Sometimes minibuses will pass the museum entrance if they’re
not full, looking for passengers. Micros to Guaqui and the Peruvian border
also leave from the plaza in Tiwanaku village, or may be flagged down just
west of the village – again, expect crowds.
Taxis to Tiwanaku from La Paz cost from B$210 to B$280 for the round
trip.
Empresa Ferroviaria Andina (FCA; 2-241-6545; www.fca.com.bo)
has started a pilot program to run occasional round-trip train trips from La
Paz’ El Alto to Tiwanaku (1.5-hour stop) and on to Guaqui on Lake Titicaca
(two-hour stop). The train departs La Paz the second Sunday of each month
at 8am and costs from B$10 to B$40. Check the website or call ahead.
Local guide Franz Choque Quispe ( 7-407-7252;
fransua_tours@hotmail.com) is working on the permits to run a two-and-ahalf-day walking, boating, busing tour from here to Lake Titicaca (just 12km
away), that will include camping and stays with local families. Check it out.
Top of section
     Includes »
     Copacabana
     Copacabana to Yampupata
     Isla del Sol
     Isla de la Luna (Koati)
     Huatajata
     Islas de Wiñaymarka
     Around Lake Titicaca
Lake Titicaca
Why Go?
A visit to the world’s largest high-altitude lake feels like a journey to the top
of the world. Everything – and everyone – that sits beside this impressive
body of water, from the traditional Aymará villages to the glacier-capped
peaks of the Cordillera Real, seems to fall into the background as the
singularity, power and sheer gravity of the lake draws all eyes. It is not hard
to see how Inca legends came to credit Lake Titicaca with the birth of their
civilization.
Set between Peru and Bolivia at 3808m, the 8400 sq km lake offers
enough activities to keep you busy for at least a week. There are trips to the
many islands that speckle the shoreline, hikes to lost coves and floating
islands, parties in the tourist hub of Copacabana and chance encounters with
locals that will provide new insight into the culture and traditions of one of
Bolivia’s top attractions.
When to Go
Feb–Nov Sunny by day, but there’s often a cool wind off the lake and
bitterly cold nights.
Feb–Apr Festivals include Semana Santa and the Fiesta de la Virgen de
Candelaria.
May The Fiesta de la Cruz (Feast of the Cross) is popular around the lake.
Best Places to Eat
»La Cúpula Restaurant ( Click here )
»La Orilla ( Click here )
»Isla Flotante Kalakota ( Click here )
Best Places to Stay
»Las Olas ( Click here )
»Hotel Rosario del Lago ( Click here )
»La Estancia Ecolodge ( Click here )
Lake Titicaca Highlights
 Visit the tiny island of Pariti, with its lovely museum ( Click here
) featuring exquisite Tiwanaku finds from a recent excavation
 Discover vestiges of the Inca culture in and around Copacabana
( Click here )
 Check out a baptism (or even a vehicle blessing!) at
Copacabana’s cathedral ( Click here )
 Travel through lakeside villages ( Click here ) between
Copacabana and Yampupata, and take a spin in a reed boat
 Explore Isla del Sol ( Click here ) on foot, hiking from tip to tail
over a few days
 Head out to Isla de la Luna ( Click here ) for spectacular lake
views, ancient ruins and landscapes straight out of the Mediterranean
 Eat fresh grilled trout on a floating island ( Click here ) with a
cold Paceña to keep you company
 Watch the sunset from the deck of your hotel, a humbling and
truly awesome experience
History
When you first glimpse Lake Titicaca’s crystalline, gemlike waters beneath
the looming backdrop of the Cordillera Real in the clear Altiplano light,
you’ll understand why pre-Inca people connected it with mystical events.
Those early inhabitants of the Altiplano believed that both the sun itself and
their bearded white god-king, Viracocha, had risen out of its mysterious
depths. The Incas, in turn, believed that it was the birthplace of their
civilization.
Archaeological discoveries indicate that the areas around the lake have
been inhabited since about 1500 BC by organized civilizations like the
Tiwanaku, Aymará and Inca. The recent discoveries of a subaquatic temple
and ancient wall have led some scientists to speculate that the lake area was
inhabited as far back as 6000 BC, when it had much lower water levels. And
while the nearby Tiwanaku ruins are the largest in the area, there are
numerous pre-Columbian sites surrounding the lake.
From pre-Columbian times to present day, the Uru people have lived on
man-made floating reed islands on the lake. The islands on the Peruvian side
of the lake are still inhabited, while the Bolivian counterparts are made
purely as tourist attractions. The Spanish arrived in the area in the mid-16th
century, resurrecting cities like Puno and Copacabana on the shore.
From year to year, changes to the water level of Lake Titicaca are not
uncommon; in the 1980s, a large flood displaced 200,000 people and it took
several years for the Río Desaguadero, the lake’s only outlet, to drain the
floodwaters. Today, with melting glaciers and inconsistent rainfalls, the
water is dropping to record-low levels.
Archaeological expeditions continue around – and beneath – the lake. At
Isla Koa, north of Isla del Sol, 22 large stone boxes were found, containing a
variety of artifacts: a silver llama, some shell figurines and several types of
incense burners. And in 2004, the tiny island of Pariti hit world headlines
when a team of Finnish and Bolivian archaeologists discovered elaborate
and beautiful pottery there, which is now housed in a small museum on the
island and in La Paz.
 Getting There & Away
The road journey between La Paz and Copa- cabana is impressive. Buses to
La Paz have been hijacked, and it’s recommended to travel by day. To get to
Copacabana by bus, you’ll need to cross the Estrecho de Tiquina (Tiquina
Straits) on a ferry. The Islas de la Luna and del Sol are accessed by boat
from Copacabana.
Copacabana
 2 / POP 54,300 / ELEV 3808M
Nestled between two hills and perched on the southern shore of Lake
Titicaca, Copa- cabana (also called Copa) is a small, bright and enchanting
town. It was for centuries the site of religious pilgrimages and today local
and international pilgrims still flock to its fiestas.
Although it can appear a little tourist-ready, the town is a pleasant place to
wander around. It has scenic walks along the lake and beyond, is the
launching pad for visiting Isla del Sol and Isla de la Luna and makes a
pleasant stopover between La Paz and Puno or Cuzco in Peru.
Copacabana
D4
C1
B4
D4
B3
(see 17)
A3
(see 17)
A6
C3
D4
A2
B4
D4
B4
B4
B4
B2
C3
B4
B2
C4
B2
B4
(see 17)
(see 15)
B3
C3
B3
 Top Sights
Cathedral
 Sights
1 Church
2 Copacabana Beach
3 Museo de la Catedral
4 Museo del Poncho
Museo Taypi
 Activities, Courses & Tours
5 Bicycle, Motorbike, Canoe & Sailboat Rentals
Turisbus
 Sleeping
6 Ecolodge del Lago
7 Hostal 6 de Agosto
8 Hostal Emperador
9 Hostal Flores del Lago
10 Hostal Los Andes
11 Hostal Sonia
12 Hostel Leyenda
13 Hotel Chasqui del Sol
14 Hotel Gloria
15 Hotel La Cúpula
16 Hotel Las Kantutas
17 Hotel Rosario del Lago
18 Hotel Utama
19 Hotel Wendy Mar
20 Las Olas
 Eating
21 Beachfront Stalls
Kota Kahuaña
La Cúpula Restaurant
22 La Orilla
23 Pensión Aransaya
24 Pueblo El Viejo
 Drinking
B3
C4
C4
A3
C3
C3
C3
25 Nemos Bar
26 Waykys
 Information
27 Centro de Información Turística
 Transport
28 Boats to Isla del Sol & Isla de la Luna
29 Buses to Puno, Cuzco, Arequipa & Lima
30 Buses, Micros & Minibuses to La Paz
31 Minibuses to Peru
History
After the fall and disappearance of the Tiwanaku culture, the Kollas
(Aymará) rose to power in the Titicaca region. Their most prominent deities
included the sun and moon (who were considered husband and wife),
Pachamama (Mother Earth) and the ambient mountain spirits known as
acha- chilas and apus. Among the idols erected on the shores of the Manco
Capac peninsula was Kota Kahuaña, also known as Copacahuana (meaning
‘lake view’ in Aymará), a deity with the head of a human and the body of a
fish.
Once the Aymará had been subsumed into the Inca empire, Emperor
Tupac- Yupanqui founded the settlement of Copa- cabana as a wayside rest
for pilgrims visiting the huaca (shrine) known as Titi Khar’ka (Rock of the
Puma), a former site of human sacrifice at the northern end of Isla del Sol.
Before the arrival of Spanish priests in the mid-16th century, the Incas had
divided local inhabitants into two distinct groups. Those faithful to the
empire were known as Haransaya and were assigned positions of power.
Those who resisted, the Hurinsaya, were relegated to manual labor. It was a
separation that went entirely against the grain of the community-oriented
Aymará culture, and the floods and crop failures that befell them in the
1570s were attributed to this social aberration.
This resulted in the rejection of the Inca religion, and the partial adoption
of Christianity and establishment of the Santuario de Copacabana, which
developed into a syncretic mishmash of both traditional and Christian
beliefs. The populace elected La Santísima Virgen de Candelaria as its
CHURCH
patron saint and established a congregation in her honor. Noting the lack of
an image for the altar, Francisco Tito Yupanqui, a direct descendant of the
Inca emperor, fashioned a figurine of clay and placed it in the church.
However, his rude effort was deemed unsuitable to represent the honored
patron of the village and was removed.
The sculptor, who was humiliated but not defeated, journeyed to Potosí to
study the arts. In 1582 he began carving a wooden image that took eight
months to complete. In 1583 La Virgen Morena del Lago (the Dark Virgin of
the Lake) was installed on the adobe altar at Copacabana and shortly
thereafter the miracles began. There were reportedly ‘innumerable’ early
healings and Copacabana quickly became a pilgrimage site.
In 1605 the Augustinian priesthood advised the community to construct a
cath- edral commensurate with the power of the image. The altar was
completed in 1614, but work on the building continued for 200 years. In
1805 the mudéjar (Moorish-style) cathedral was finally consecrated, but
construction wasn’t completed until 1820. In 1925, Francisco Tito
Yupanqui’s image was canonized by the Vatican.
Sights & Activities
Copacabana’s central attractions can be visited in one long but relaxed day,
but there are some great trips further afield, including to the surrounding
peninsulas. Much of the action in Copa centers around Plaza 2 de Febrero
and Av 6 de Agosto, the main commercial drag, which runs east to west. The
transportation hub is in Plaza Sucre. At its western end is the lake and a
walkway (Costañera) that traces the shoreline.
Cathedral
Offline map Google map
(6 de Agosto) The sparkling white mudéjar cathedral, with its domes and
colorful azulejos (blue Portuguese-style ceramic tiles), dominates the town.
Baptisms take place every Saturday at 4pm; check the notice board in front
of the entrance for the mass schedule.
The cathedral’s black Virgen de Candelaria statue, Camarín de la Virgen
de Candelaria, carved by Incan Emperor Tupac-Yupanqui’s grandson,
Francisco Yupanqui, is encased above the altar upstairs in the camarín
BEACH
LOOKOUT
RUIN
(shrine); note, visiting hours can be unreliable. The statue is never moved
from the cathedral, as superstition suggests that its disturbance would
precipitate a devastating flood of Lake Titicaca.
The cathedral is a repository for both European and local religious art and
the Museo de la Catedral Offline map Google map (per person B$10,
minimum 4) contains some interesting articles – offerings from hopeful
individuals. Unfortunately, the museum is open only to groups of four or
more (unless you’re happy to pay) and you’ll most probably need to chase
down a sister to arrange your visit.
Copacabana Beach
Offline map Google map
While Bolivia’s only public beach can’t hold a candle to the better-known
beach of the same name in Rio de Janeiro, on weekends the festive
atmosphere is a magnet for families. You can take a pew at one of the many
little eateries along (unfortunately) the drain-ridden shore front, play foosball
against the local talent and rent all manner of watercraft, from paddleboat
swans (B$10 per hour) and canoes (B$30 per hour) to small sailboats (B$50
per hour). Also on offer are horseback rides (B$40 per hour), bicycles (B$10
per hour, B$70 per day) and motorbikes (B$50 per hour).
Cerro Calvario
The summit of Cerro Calvario can be reached in half an hour and is well
worth the climb, especially in the late afternoon to watch the sun set over the
lake. The trail to the summit begins near the church Offline map Google map at
the end of Calle Destacamento and climbs past the 14 Stations of the Cross.
Horca del Inca
(admission B$10) This odd gate is a fascinating pre-Inca astronomical
observatory. Perched on the hillside, it is surrounded by pierced rocks that
permit the sun’s rays to pass through onto the lintel during the solstice of
June 21, the Aymará New Year. Locals use the event to predict everything
from the expected rainfall to the crop yields. During this time locals venture
up before sunrise to celebrate. From near the end of Calle Murillo, a
signposted trail leads uphill to the site.
RUIN
RUIN
MUSEUM, RUIN
MUSEUM
Cerro Kopakati
About 4km down the road from the Horca del Inca toward Kasani (near the
turnoff to the floating islands) lies Cerro Kopakati, a carved stone featuring
pre-Inca ruins and pictographs. The best known, though difficult to
distinguish, is the Escudo de la Cultura Chiripa, a unique icon attributed
to the pre-Inca Chiripa culture.
Tribunal del Inca (Intikala)
Offline map Google map
(admission B$5) North of the cemetery on the southeastern outskirts of town
is the sadly neglected site of artificially sculpted boulders known as the Inca
Tribunal. Its original purpose is unknown, but there are several carved stones
with asientos (seats), basins and hornecinos (niches), which probably once
contained idols.
Kusijata & Baño del Inca
Offline map Google map
(admission B$10) A 3km walk northeast along the shoreline from the end of
Calles Junín or Hugo Ballivián leads to the community of Kusijata, where
there’s a former colonial hacienda housing a small, dusty (read untouched)
archaeological display. If you can see in the semi-dark – there’s no
electricity – seek out the long-deceased mummified corpse (chullpa) sitting
in an upright fetal position, as he was buried. If no one is at the entrance,
simply ask around. You can also enter the now-unkempt gardens where
there’s a pre-Columbian irrigation channel, originally used to access the
subterranean water supply. Head past the first gushing pipe and follow the
path to the carved-stone Baño del Inca (Inca Bath), the origins and meaning
of which are a little unclear.
Museo del Poncho
Offline map Google map
(www.museodelponcho.org; Baptista near Costañera; admission B$15;
10:30am-5pm Mon-Sat, 10:30am-3pm Sun) A visit to the Museo del Poncho
will help you unravel the mysteries of the regional textiles (pun intended).
The exhibits, spread over two floors, give a clear insight into the origins and
MUSEUM
meanings of the poncho and its associated crafts. Labels are in both English
and Spanish. Hours are irregular.
 Museo Taypi
Offline map Google map
(Hotel Rosario del Lago, Paredes near Costañera) Museo Taypi is a small,
privately run cultural museum within the grounds of Hotel Rosario with a
small but lovely collection of antiquities and cultural displays on the region.
Here you’ll also find Jalsuri, a fair-trade craft shop selling quality artesanía.
OUTDOOR ADVENTURES FROM COPA
The areas around Copacabana offer plenty of adventure. The trip to Yampupata is a worthwhile
excursion by foot, bike or bus. And here are a few DIY activities that will take you beyond the
standard tourist tracks.
Las Islas Flotantes (floating reed islands) Visit a community project at Sahuiña, approximately
6km from Copa, for a delightful spin on one of the most tranquil parts of the lake in a rowboat or
a totora -reed boat (B$10 to B$15 per person per island). Hint: take the minibus towards Kasani
(B$3) and ask to be dropped off at the entrance to the project (a 10-minute ride). The office is 15
minutes on foot from here and it’s another 15 minutes to the boats.
Lost ruins Ask the Centro de Información Turística ( Click here ) for a list of nearby Inca ruins
and strike out on your own. Some, but not all, Inca sites are listed here. Admittedly, many are
now neglected or rarely visited. Let us know what you find!
Hike south of town Hike around the stunning peninsula south of town to get a different
perspective of the lake. To start your hike, head out 6km to the village of J’iska Q’ota, near the
ex- pista (former airport strip). To get there, catch a minibus marked ‘Kasani’ (B$3) and after
about 10 minutes you’ll arrive at the strip. Follow the road towards the lake heading in a
northeasterly – and then northerly – direction around the peninsula and back to Copa.
Bike from town Hire a bike at Copacabana Beach and head off into the hills or in the direction of
Yampupata – a hilly, but beautiful, journey.
Tours
To visit Islas del Sol and de la Luna you can either take a ferry or go the
luxury route with a La Paz–based tour operator for a guided excursion
GUIDED TOUR
GUIDED TOUR
GUIDED TOUR
GUIDED TOUR
SPIRITUAL
(adding a night or two in their hotels on Isla del Sol). Top guided trips
include the following:
Balsa Tours
( 244-0620; www.turismobalsa.com) Offers motor excursions from its
resort at Puerto Pérez to Islas Pariti, Kalahuta and Suriqui.
Crillon Tours
( 233-7533; www.titicaca.com; Camacho 1223, La Paz) An upmarket
agency with a hydrofoil service offering various day and multiday packages
kicking off from the lakefront village of Huatajata. Enquire at the Inca
Utama Hotel and Spa in the village for info.
Transturin
( 242-2222; www.transturin.com; Arce 2678, La Paz) This agency runs
day and overnight cruises to Isla del Sol in covered catamarans (and
reedboats) and has luxury accommodation on Isla del Sol.
Turisbus
Offline map Google map
( 245-1341; www.turisbus.com; Hotel Rosario del Lago, Paredes near
Costañera) Book your tour with this well-run and professional agency
through the Hotel Rosario in Copacabana or La Paz.
Festivals & Events
Copacabana hosts several major annual fiestas. The town also celebrates the
La Paz departmental anniversary on July 15. Thursdays and Sundays are
lively market days. Watch your belongings; with lots of partying – and
people from out of town – there’s plenty of petty theft during Copacabana’s
festivals.
Alasitas Festival
One local tradition is the blessing of miniature objects, such as cars or
houses. Supplicants pray that the real thing will be obtained in the coming
RELIGIOUS
RELIGIOUS
RELIGIOUS
NATIONAL HOLIDAY
year. Held on January 24.
Fiesta de la Virgen de Candelaria
Honors the patron saint of Copacabana and all Bolivia. Copacabana holds an
especially big bash and pilgrims and dancers come from Peru and around
Bolivia. There’s much music, traditional Aymará dancing, drinking and
feasting. On the third day celebrations culminate with the gathering of 100
bulls in a stone corral along the Yampupata road. The town’s braver (and
drunker) citizens jump into the arena and try to avoid being attacked. From
February 2 to 5.
Semana Santa
As part of the Easter Week celebrations the town fills with pilgrims on Good
Friday – some walk the 158km journey from La Paz – to do penance at the
Stations of the Cross on Cerro Calvario. Beginning at the cath- edral at dusk,
pilgrims join a solemn candlelit procession through town, led by a statue of
Christ in a glass coffin and a replica of the Virgen de Candelaria. Once on
the summit they light incense and purchase miniatures representing material
possessions in the hope that they will be granted the real things by the Virgin
during the year.
Fiesta de la Cruz
(Feast of the Cross) Celebrated over the first weekend in May (or on May 3
– check, as dates change) all around the lake, but the biggest festivities are in
Copacabana.
Bolivian Independence Day
Copacabana stages its biggest event during the first week in August. It’s
characterized by round-the-clock music, parades, brass bands, fireworks and
amazing alcohol consumption. This coincides with a traditional pilgrimage
that brings thousands of Peruvians into the town to visit the Virgin.
BENEDICIÓN DE MOVILIDADES
BOUTIQUE HOTEL
HOTEL
The word cha’lla is used for any ritual blessing, toast or offering to the powers that be, whether
Inca, Aymará or Christian. On most mornings during the festival season from around 10am (and
reliably on Saturday and Sunday), cars, trucks and buses hover in front of Copacabana’s cathedral
decked out in garlands of real or plastic flowers, colored ribbons and flags. They come for a
cha’lla known as the Benedición de Movilidades (Blessing of Automobiles). Petitions for
protection are made to the Virgin and a ritual offering of alcohol is poured over the vehicles – and
sometimes into the driver – thereby consecrating them for the journey home. Between Good
Friday and Easter Sunday, the cha’lla is especially popular among pilgrims and long-distance bus
companies with new fleets. Drivers offer the priest donations for their blessings, but per vehicle
it’s still a cheap alternative to insurance!
Sleeping
During fiestas accommodation fills up quickly and prices increase up to
threefold. Ironically, given its lakeside position, Copacabana’s water supply
is unpredictable. Better hotels go to extreme efforts to fill water tanks in the
morning (the supply is normally switched off at some time between 8am and
noon).
A host of budget options abound, charging about B$30 per person
(significantly more in high season and festivals), especially along Calle
Jáuregui.
Las Olas $$
Offline map Google map
( 7250-8668; www.hostallasolas.com; Michel Pérez 1-3; s B$210-224, d
B$266-294; ) To say too much about this place is to spoil the surprise,
so we’ll merely give you a taste with a few simple descriptives: quirky,
creative, stylish, ecofriendly, million-dollar vistas. Plus there are kitchens,
private terraces with hammocks and a solar-powered Jacuzzi. You get the
idea – a once-in-a-lifetime experience and well worth the splurge. Reserve
one to two weeks ahead and get here by passing by its partner hotel, La
Cúpula.
Hotel Rosario del Lago $$$
Offline map Google map
HOTEL
HOTEL
LODGE
( 862-2141, La Paz 2-245-1341; www.hotelrosario.com/lago; Paredes
near Costañera; s/d/tr incl breakfast B$560/700/850; ) One of the
smartest places in town, the hacienda-styled, three-star sister of Hotel
Rosario in La Paz has charming modern rooms with solar-heated showers,
double-glazed windows and lake views. Extras include magnetic locks, room
safes and excellent service. The Altiplano light streams in and there’s a
pleasant sun terrace. An onsite museum, top-quality restaurant and a travel
agency, Turisbus, add to the experience.
Hotel La Cúpula $$
Offline map Google map
( 862-2029; www.hotelcupula.com; Michel Pérez 1-3; s/d/ste
B$133/210/266; ) International travelers rave about this inviting oasis,
marked by two gleaming white domes on the slopes of Cerro Calvario, with
stupendous lake views. The rooms are pretty basic – and the beds will be too
soft for some – but we love the gardens, hammocks, shared kitchen and
friendly atmosphere. The helpful staff speak several languages. Best to
reserve ahead.
Hostal Flores del Lago $
Offline map Google map
( 862-2117; www.taypibolivia.com; Jáuregui; s/d/tr B$80/120/180; )
This large four-story hotel on the north side of the harbor is a top-tier budget
option. The clean rooms are slightly damp, but you’ll love the views and the
friendly lobby area.
Ecolodge del Lago $$
Offline map Google map
( 862-2500; www.ecocopacabana.com; s/d/tr B$180/320/480) Situated 20
minutes on foot along the Costañera (or a quick taxi ride), this ecofriendly
place, right on the lake in a wonderful nature paradise, offers a tranquil
experience. The quirky adobe rooms and self-equipped apartments are selfheated thanks to the mud bricks and have solar-powered water. The rambling
garden of dahlias and gladioli affords great views of the lake.
HOTEL
HOTEL
HOTEL
HOTEL
HOTEL
Hostel Leyenda $
Offline map Google map
( 7067-4097; hostel.leyenda@gmail.com; cnr Av Busch & Constañera; s/d
incl breakfast B$80/120; ) A solid bet for budgeteers, with views of the
water, a lush garden and ‘Bolivian Boutique’ rooms. The corner rooms have
lots of space for the same price and the top-story suite (also the same price)
has a totora -reed raft and its own terrace.
Hostal Sonia $
Offline map Google map
( 862-2019; hostalsoniacopacabana@gmail.com; Murillo 256; s/d
B$40/70; ) Well worth the extra B$10 more than other budget options
charge, this lively spot has bright and cheery rooms, great views from the
upstairs rooms and a top-floor terrace, making it one of the top budget bets
in town.
Hostal Los Andes $
Offline map Google map
( 862-2103; fvelazquez@entelnet.bo; Busch s/n; s/d incl breakfast
B$100/140; ) Although nothing fancy, this top-notch budget choice is neat
and clean, light and breezy, polished and professional. The top-floor rooms
offer good views. There’s cable TV and gas – yay, not electric – showers.
We only wish there were better common areas.
Hostal Emperador $
Offline map Google map
( 862-2083; Murillo 235; r per person B$30, without bathroom B$20)
This budget travelers’ favorite is a basic, albeit lively and colorful, joint with
hot showers, a laundry service, a small shared kitchen and luggage storage.
A newer wing at the back has brighter rooms with bathrooms and a sunny
terrace, ideal for lounging and views.
Hotel Wendy Mar $
Offline map Google map
HOTEL
HOTEL
HOTEL
HOTEL
HOTEL
( 862-2124; hotelwendymar01@hotmail.com; 16 de Julio; r B$70-90; )
Everything about this excellent budget option is neat and orderly, from the
hospital corner sheets to the spotless floors.
Hotel Utama $$
Offline map Google map
( 862-2013; www.utamahotel.com; cnr Michel Peréz & San Antonio; s/d
incl breakfast B$105/175; ) Set on the hill overlooking town, this
clean reliable option has firm beds, a fun central terrace and sketchy electric
showers. Try to get a room with a view. Free bag storage and a book
exchange add to the mix.
Hostal 6 de Agosto $
Offline map Google map
(Av 6 de Agosto; r per person B$30) A rosy and very central place with a
sunny outlook over a garden and clean, if standard, rooms at dirt-cheap
prices.
Hotel Gloria $$$
Offline map Google map
( 862-2094; www.hotelgloria.com.bo; 16 de Julio & Manuel Mejía; r incl
breakfast B$450; ) While it feels a bit like a hospital, this resort-style
hotel is a decent (if slightly decaying) top-tier option.
Hotel Las Kantutas $$
Offline map Google map
( 862-2093; hotelkantutas@entelnet.bo; Jáuregui, cnr Bolívar; incl
breakfast s B$80-100, d B$140-160) This central option has slightly stinky
rooms and stained bed spreads, but will do in a pinch come festival time
when it’s tough to find accommodation.
Hotel Chasqui del Sol $$
Offline map Google map
INTERNATIONAL
INTERNATIONAL
( 7-359-4599; www.chasquidelsol.com; Costañera 55; s/d incl breakfast
B$80/170; ) A lurking beachfront behemoth with basic rooms, dirty
towels and pretty damned good views. For the price, you can probably do a
little better.
Eating
The specialty is trucha criolla (rainbow trout) and pejerrey (king fish) from
Lake Titicaca. The trout were introduced in 1939 to increase protein content
in the local diet. Today, trout stocks are mainly grown in hatcheries; pejerrey
stocks are seriously depleted. The catch of the day is served ad nauseam to
varying degrees of taste – some resemble electrocuted sardines while others
are worthy of a Michelin restaurant rating.
Some of the best trout is served at the beachfront stalls Offline map
Google map and can cost as little as B$20, though hygiene is questionable.
The bargain basement is the market comedor (dining hall), where you can
eat a generous meal of trucha or beef for a pittance, or an ‘insulin shock’
breakfast or afternoon tea of hot api morado (hot corn drink; B$2) and
syrupy buñuelos (donuts or fritters; B$1).
A Groundhog Day horde of eateries lies along Av 6 de Agosto.
La Orilla $$
Offline map Google map
( 862-2267; Av 6 de Agosto; mains B$25-45; 4-9:30pm Mon-Sat; )
Some say this cozy maritime-themed restaurant is the best restaurant in
town, with fresh, crunchy-from-the-vine vegetables, crispy and super savory
pizzas and interesting trout creations that incorporate spinach and bacon
(mmm, bacon). They might just be right.
La Cúpula Restaurant $$
Offline map Google map
(www.hotelcupula.com; Michel Pérez 1-3; mains B$20-50; closed lunch
Tue; ) Inventive use of local ingredients make up an extensive
international and local menu. The vegetarian range includes a tasty lasagna
and there’s plenty for carnivores, too. Dip your way through the cheese
INTERNATIONAL
INTERNATIONAL
BOLIVIAN
BAR
fondue with authentic Gruyère cheese – it’s to die for…which leaves the
Bolivian chocolate fondue with fruit platter beyond description. The glassy
surroundings admit lots of Altiplano light and maximize the fabulous view
of the lake.
Kota Kahuaña $$
Offline map Google map
( 862-2141; Paredes at Costañera; mains B$25-55) This hotel restaurant
has excellent views of the lake, great service and well-prepared international
dishes. While it is one of the more expensive in town, it also has higher
standards than some of its counterparts. Stuffed trout, an excellent salad bar,
and satisfying main courses and Bolivian wines ensure a fine-dining
experience.
Pueblo El Viejo $$
Offline map Google map
(Av 6 de Agosto 684; mains B$35-50) Readers love this rustic, cozy and
chilled cafe-bar, with its ethnic decor and laid-back atmosphere. It serves up
a good burger and pizza, and is open until late. Service can be quite slow, so
plan on being here a while.
Pensión Aransaya $
Offline map Google map
(Av 6 de Agosto 121; almuerzo B$15, mains B$25-40; lunch) Superfriendly local favorite for a tall, cold beer and trout heaped with all the
trimmings. It’s neat, clean, very traditional and popular with the locals.
Drinking
New nightspots come and go as frequently as tour boats. As well as Pueblo
El Viejo, the following places are among the reliable options.
Waykys
Offline map Google map
BAR
(Av 16 de Julio, at Busch) A friendly, warm den of a place with cozy corners,
graffiti-covered walls and ceilings (you can add what you want), a billiards
table, book exchange and range of music.
Nemos Bar
Offline map Google map
(Av 6 de Agosto) This dimly lit, late-night hangout is a popular place for a
tipple.
Shopping
Local specialties include handmade miniatures of totora -reed boats and
unusual varieties of Andean potatoes. Massive bags of pasankalla, which is
puffed choclo (corn) with caramel, the South American version of popcorn,
abound. Dozens of stores sell llama- and alpaca-wool hats and sweaters; a
reasonable alpaca piece will cost about B$80. Vehicle adornments used in
the cha’lla, miniatures and religious paraphernalia are sold at stalls in front
of the cathedral.
Information
Dangers & Annoyances
There are continuing reports of nasty incidents involving travelers on illegal
minibuses and taxis offering services from Copacabana and La Paz,
especially on those that arrive in La Paz at night. Syndicates, posing as
fellow passengers, kidnap and hold tourists bound and blindfolded for more
than 24 hours while their bank accounts are depleted to the maximum
amount permitted. The smaller minibuses are more dangerous – they tend to
be packed with people and are prone to speed. Travelers are encouraged to
take the formal tourist buses (or the larger buses) and schedule your trip to
arrive by day.
Tourists should also be especially careful during festivals. Stand well back
during fireworks displays, when explosive fun seems to take priority over
crowd safety, and be wary of light-fingered revelers.
The thin air, characteristically brilliant sunshine and reflection off the
water mean scorching levels of ultraviolet radiation. Wear a hat and
sunscreen in this region, and drink lots of water to avoid dehydration.
Internet Access
Entel Internet alf@net (Av 6 de Agosto; per hr B$10; 9am-11pm) The
best connection (and cheap video rentals and a book exchange) is available
at this friendly place.
Entel Internet (Av 6 de Agosto; per hr B$10; 8:30am-11pm) A second,
smaller branch.
Left Luggage
Most hotels will hold luggage free of charge for customers for a few days if
you want to take a trip to Isla del Sol.
Medical Services
There is a basic hospital on the southern outskirts of town with medical and
dental facilities, but for serious situations don’t think twice – head straight to
La Paz.
Money
Travelers beware: the ATMs in town often don’t work. Av 6 de Agosto is the
Wall Street of Copacabana and nearly every shop will exchange foreign
currency (dollars are preferred over euros and must be clean – not ripped –
bills. The Banco Bisa ATM (6 de Agosto & Pando) works on most
international systems, if it works at all. You can buy Peruvian soles at most
artesanías (stores selling handcrafted items) , but you’ll normally find better
rates in Kasani at the Bolivian border, or Yuguyo, just beyond the Peruvian
border.
Post
Post office ( 8:30am-noon & 2:30am-4pm Tue-Sun) On the north side of
Plaza 2 de Febrero, but often closed or unattended.
Telephone
Entel, Cotel, Tigo and Viva puntos (privately run phone offices) are dotted
along Av 6 de Agosto and around town.
Tourist Information
Centro de Información Turística Offline map Google map (16 de Julio, near
Plaza Sucre; 9am-1pm & 2-6pm Wed-Sun; ) There is a helpful Englishspeaking attendant, although only rudimentary information is available.
Copacabana community tourism site (www.copacabana-bolivia.com) Has
a good events calendar and updated info on community tourism projects.
Run by tourism operator Turisbus.
Getting There & Away
Bus
Most buses leave from near Plazas 2 de Febrero or Sucre. The more
comfortable nonstop tour buses from La Paz to Copacabana – including
Milton Tours and Combi Tours – cost from about B$25 to B$30 and are well
worth the investment as night-time hijackings are not uncommon on this
route. They depart from La Paz at about 8am and leave Copacabana at
1:30pm (3½ hours). Tickets can be purchased from tour agencies. You will
need to exit the bus at the Estrecho de Tiquina (Tiquina Straits), to cross via
ferry (per person B$1.50 per car B$35-40, 5am-9pm) between the towns of
San Pedro de Tiquina (should you need it, there’s a tourist office on the main
plaza) to San Pablo de Tiquina.
Buses to Peru, including Arequipa, Cuzco and Puno, depart and arrive in
Copacabana from Av 6 de Agosto. You can also get to Puno by catching a
public minibus from Plaza Sucre to the border at Kasani (B$3, 15 minutes).
Across the border there’s frequent, if crowded, onward transportation to
Yunguyo (five minutes) and Puno (2½ hours).
BUS COSTS & DISTANCES
DESTINATION COST (B$) DURATION (HR)
Arequipa 120 8.5
Cuzco 110 15
La Paz 30 3.5
Puno 30 3-4
Boat
Buy your tickets for boat tours to Isla de la Luna and Isla del Sol from
agencies on Av 6 de Agosto or from beachfront kiosks. Traveling in a big
group? Consider renting a private boat through one of the following
operators for B$600 per day. Separate return services are available from both
islands.
Asociación Unión Marines (Costañera; one-way B$20, round-trip B$25 ;
departs Copacabana 8:30am & 1:30pm) Ferry service to the north and
south of Isla del Sol, with a stop on the return at a floating island.
Titicaca Tours (Costañera; round-trip B$35; departs Copacabana
8:30am) Offers a round-trip boat tour that stops on Isla de la Luna for an
hour, continuing to the southern end of Isla del Sol for a two-hour stop
before heading back to Copacabana.
ENTERING OR LEAVING PERU
Most travelers enter/exit Peru via Copacabana (and the Tiquina Straits) or the scruffy town of
Desaguadero (avoiding Copacabana altogether). Note that Peruvian time is one hour behind
Bolivian time, and Bolivian border agents often charge an unofficial B$30 (collaboration fee) to
use the border. Always keep your backpack with you when crossing the border.
Via Copacabana
Micros to the Kasani-Yunguyo border leave Copacabana’s Plaza Sucre regularly, usually when
full (B$3, 15 minutes). At Kasani you obtain your exit stamp at passport control and head on foot
across the border. Sometimes the border agent will charge you a nominal fee for the crossing
(about B$30). On the Peruvian side, micros and taxis will ferry you to Yunguyo (about 6 Peruvian
soles, 15 minutes). From here, you can catch a bus heading to Puno. An efficient alternative is to
catch a tourist bus from/to La Paz to Puno via Copacabana (from B$60); some allow you a
couple of days’ stay in Copacabana. Note, though, that even if you’ve bought a ticket to Cusco or
elsewhere in Peru, you’ll change buses in Puno. Buses to Cusco depart from Puno’s international
terminal, located about three blocks from the local terminal.
Via Desaguadero
A quicker, if less interesting, route is via Desaguadero on the southern side of the lake. Several
bus companies head to/from this border from/to Peru. The crossing should be hassle-free: you
obtain your exit stamp from the Bolivian passport control (possible fee of B$30; 8:30am-
8:30pm), walk across a bridge and get an entry stamp at migración in Peru. Frequent buses head
to Puno hourly (about 3½ hours).
Copacabana to Yampupata
Hiking, biking or simply busing along the road from Copacabana to
Yampupata, a small hamlet about 17km north of town, is a fun little
adventure and an interesting alternative to the standard Copa–Isla tour.
Along the way, you’ll see ruins, stop at floating islands, get chased by dogs
and pass through traditional communities.
MAIN ROUTE
If walking, this trek is road-bound, making it a fairly hot and hard slog
(allow seven hours one way if you’re stopping along the way). By bike the
round-trip can be done in a day, while taxi or minibus trips will take under
an hour one way. Take your own snacks; there’s little, if anything, along the
way.
From Copacabana, head northeast on the road that follows the shoreline.
Just after the Baño del Inca turnoff the Isla Flotante Kalakota Offline map is
a good spot to stop for a fresh-caught trout lunch (B$25). About 1½ hours
into the journey, you arrive at the Gruta de Lourdes (aka Gruta de Fátima),
a cave that for locals evokes images of its respective French and Portuguese
namesakes. For a shortcut, turn right immediately after the small bridge
leading to the Virgin and follow the Inca path. When the path peters out head
directly uphill to rejoin the main road at the crest. To save an hour or so and
avoid the flat and litter-strewn outskirts of town, you can catch a minibus
(B$5) or taxi (one way/return B$40/70) from Copa to the cave (9km), from
where the more picturesque hiking begins.
At the fork just below the crest of the hill bear left and descend to the
shore and into the village of Titicachi where, if it’s open, there’s a basic
tienda (shop) selling soft drinks. For die-hard archaeologists, in and around
Titicachi are some pre-Inca walls and the abandoned Tiahuanacota Inca
cemetery, but these are not obvious to the visitor. The community runs a
couple of floating islands (B$10 per person per island) just off-shore.
At the next village, Sicuani, the Hostal Yampu offers very basic
accommodations with bucket showers, but is not always in operation. Hikers
can pop in for a beer or soft drink. Ask around town for trips around the bay
in a totora -reed boat or via motorboat to the peninsula opposite (prices
negotiable). For those who want to spend the night in isolation, you can
camp here.
Five to six hours from Copacabana you’ll reach Yampupata, a collection
of lakefront adobe houses. If you ask around, you’ll find rooms for rent.
Asociación Transport Yampu Tour Lacustre ( Click here ) takes passengers
across to the south of Isla del Sol for B$100 or to the north for B$200.
B$200 will also get you to Isla de la Luna. A rowboat to Fuente del Inca
(B$30) or Pilko Kaina (B$20) makes for an interesting journey to the
southern end of Isla del Sol.
Yampupata
B3
B4
B1
B4
A2
B1
B4
A2
 Sights
1 Gruta de Lourdes (Gruta de Fatimá)
2 Kusijata & Baño del Inca
3 Templo de las Vírgenes
4 Tribunal del Inca (Intikala)
 Sleeping
5 Hostal Yampu
6 Settlement
 Eating
7 Isla Flotante Kalakota
 Transport
8 Asociación Transport Yampu Tour Lacustre
ALTERNATIVE ROUTES
An alternative hiking option, especially for those who don’t want to head to
Isla del Sol, is to catch a taxi (B$80) from Copacabana along the main road
and stop at villages along the way. You finish at the beautiful and unspoiled
cobblestone village of Sampaya, 5km from Yampupata, which has some
basic hotels. You can return on foot to Copacabana via the higher eastern
route (four hours). Although this road doesn’t pass through main villages, it
affords magnificent views and a more nature-bound experience.
CONSTRUCTION OF A TOTORA-REED
BOAT
The construction of totora -reed boats is an art form. Green reeds are gathered from the lake
shallows and left to dry in the sun. Once free of moisture, they are organized into fat bundles and
lashed together with strong grass. In former days, a sail of reeds was often added. These bloated
little canoes don’t last long as far as watercraft go; after several months of use they become
waterlogged and begin to rot and sink. Traditionally, the canoes often would have been stored
some distance away from the water to increase their life span. Now the boats are made and used
mainly for tourism purposes.
In the early 1970s Dr Thor Heyerdahl, the Norwegian adventurer and ethnographer, solicited
the help of the well-known shipbuilders from Lake Titicaca’s Isla Suriqui, the Limachi brothers
and Paulino Esteban, to design and construct his vessel Ra II to sail from Morocco to Barbados.
Dr Heyerdahl wanted to test his theory that migration and early contact occurred between the
ancient peoples of North Africa and the Americas. He planned to show the feasibility of traveling
great distances using the boats of the period, in this case, papyrus craft.
Getting There & Away
Taxis from Copacabana to Yampupata cost about B$80. For those who don’t
want to walk or catch a taxi, the easiest way to travel between Yampupata
and Copacabana is by minibus (B$10, 40 minutes). At the time of research,
these were leaving Copacabana’s 2 de Febrero Plaza, every two hours or so.
Isla del Sol
POP 2500 / ELEV 3808M
Easily the highlight of any Lake Titicaca excursion (and perhaps your entire
Bolivia romp), Isla del Sol is a large island with several traditional
communities, decent tourist infrastructure such as hotels and restaurants, a
few worthwhile pre-Columbian ruins, amazing views, great hikes and, well,
lots of sun.
The large 70 sq km island definitely merits a night or two – you can then
devote a day each to the northern and southern ends. While the day tour
gives you a decent introduction to the island (you can do a walking circuit of
the main sights in a long day), whirlwind half-day tours are strictly for the
been-there-done-that crowd.
The island’s permanent residents – a mix of indigenous peoples and recent
émigrés/escapers – are distributed between the main settlements of
Cha’llapampa, near the island’s northern end; Cha’lla, which backs onto a
lovely sandy beach on the central east coast; and Yumani, which straddles
the ridge above the Escalera del Inca in the south and is the biggest town on
the island.
There are no vehicles on Isla del Sol, so visitors are limited to hiking
along rocky trails (some are now paved in Inca style) or traveling by boat.
The main ports are at Pilko Kaina, the Escalera del Inca in Yumani and near
the Templo del Inca and Chincana ruins at Cha’llapampa. There’s also a
small port at Japapi on the southwest coast.
Extensive networks of walking tracks make exploration fairly easy,
though the altitude and sun may take their toll. Hikers should carry lunch
and ample water. The sun was born here and is still going strong; a good
sunscreen is essential, particularly by the water.
Isla Del Sol
B2
A2
A1
(see 2)
B2
C4
C4
C4
B3
B2
B2
(see 17)
C4
C4
B3
B2
C3
(see 11)
(see 11)
C3
C4
C4
C4
C3
(see 19)
 Sights
1 Cha’llapampa Museum
2 Chincana Ruins
3 Marka Pampa
Mesa Ceremónica
4 Piedra Sagrada
5 Pilko Kaina
6 Ruins
7 Ruins
8 Ruins
9 Templo del Inca (Templo del Sol)
 Sleeping
10 Hostal Cultural
Hostal Illampu
11 Hostal Inti Wayra
12 Hostal Puerta del Sol
13 Hostal Qhumphuri
14 Hostal San Francisco
15 Hostal Templo del Sol
Hotel Imperio del Sol
Inka Pacha
16 Inti Kala Hostal
17 Inti Wasi Lodge
18 La Estancia Ecolodge
19 Las Cabañas
20 Palla Khasa
 Information
Public Toilets
History
The Island of the Sun was known to early inhabitants as Titi Khar’ka (Rock
of the Puma), from which Lake Titicaca takes its name. This island has been
identified as the birthplace of several revered entities, including the sun
itself. Legend has it that the bearded white god-king Viracocha and the first
Incas, Manco Capac and his sister-wife Mama Ocllo, mystically appeared
GARDENS
VILLAGE
under direct orders from the sun. Most modern-day Aymará and Quechua
peoples of Peru and Bolivia accept these legends as their creation story.
Sights & Activities
You’ll need to walk everywhere, so allow plenty of time to explore the
island. There’s a B$5 fee to cross the island and each site exacts its own
admission fees. These fees change regularly and are leveraged to maintain
tourist infrastructure.
There are two major routes between the northern and southern ends of Isla
del Sol. The lower route winds scenically through fields, hamlets and
villages, and around the bays and headlands above the eastern coast. The
most commonly used route follows the dramatic ridge path that runs
between Cha’llapampa in the north and Yumani in the south. In the north,
the Chincana ruins sit on top of an uninhabited ridge. The views down to
both coasts of the island are nothing short of spectacular.
SOUTHERN ISLA DEL SOL
Fuente del Inca & Escalera del Inca
(admission B$5) Just uphill from the ferry dock at the village of Yumani, this
lovely hanging garden and rolling waterfall is most people’s introduction to
Isla del Sol. As you head up from the dock along the beautifully
reconstructed Escalera del Inca (Inca stairway), you’ll pass plenty of
terraced gardens, small shops and hotels. The road is crisscrossed by three
artificial stone channels that start in the Fuente del Inca natural springs. It’s a
lung-buster that gains almost 200m in elevation over less than 1km, so take
your time – or hire donkeys (B$30 to B$50) to carry your pack.
Early Spaniards believed Yumani’s spring was a fountain of youth and for
the Incas the three streams represented their national motto: Ama sua, Ama
llulla, Ama khella, meaning ‘Don’t steal, don’t lie and don’t be lazy.’ Today,
the fountain is a crucial source of water for locals, who come daily to fetch
and carry it up the steep trail.
Pay your admission fee at the dock for access to the stairway and village.
Yumani
RUINS
VILLAGE
Yumani is the main village at the south end of the island. Most boats drop
you at the village’s dock, about 200m downhill along the Escalera Inca from
the town proper. The village’s small church, Iglesia de San Antonio, serves
the southern half of the island. Nearby you’ll find an exploding cluster of
guesthouses and fabulous views over the water to Isla de la Luna. You can
climb to the ridge for a view down to the deep sapphire-colored Bahía Kona
on the western shore (about a half-hour hike along a well-worn trail). From
the crest you’ll also find routes leading downhill to the tiny pretty village of
Japapi and north along the ridge to the Chincana ruins and Cha’llapampa.
With extra time you can make your way over the isthmus and up onto the
prominent Kakayo-Queña Ridge, the island’s southwestern extremity. The
serene walk along the ridge to the lighthouse at the southern tip takes at
least half a day (return) from Yumani.
Pilko Kaina
Offline map
(admission B$5) This prominent ruins complex near the southern tip of the
island, about 30 minutes (2km) south by foot from Yumani, sits well
camouflaged against a steep terraced slope. The best-known site is the twolevel Palacio del Inca, thought to have been constructed by the Incan
Emperor Tupac-Yupanq. The rectangular windows and doors taper upward
from their sill and thresholds to narrower lintels that cover them on top. The
arched roof vault was once covered with flagstone shingle and then
reinforced with a layer of mud and straw.
Cha’lla
(admission B$5) This agreeable little village stretches along a magnificent
sandy beach that could be straight out of a holiday brochure for the Greek
islands. The village is spread out – it extends over the hill to the south.
There’s a small kiosk and a guesthouse, Hostal Qhumphuri ( Click here ).
You have to pay an admission fee to pass along the trail into town.
In the pastoral flatlands over the low pass between Cha’lla and Yumani is
the Museo Étnico (admission free with Cha’lla trail fee), with some dusty
exhibits including Inca pots. It’s an hour’s walk (4km) north of Yumani
along the lower path (or on the western route if coming from the north). It’s
VILLAGE
RUINS
RUINS
worth it for the stunning bay and valley views; the museum itself is
disappointing and you will have to ask around to be let in.
NORTHERN ISLA DEL SOL
Cha’llapampa
(museum admission B$10 – includes Chicana Ruins entrance) Most boat
tours visiting the northern ruins land at Cha’llapampa, a small village
straddling a slender isthmus. The small Cha’llapampa Museum Offline map
(admission B$10) contains artifacts excavated in 1992 from Marka Pampa,
referred to by locals as La Ciudad Submergida (Sunken City). Among the
dusty exhibits are anthropomorphic figurines, Tiwanaku-era artifacts, animal
bones, skull parts, puma-shaped ceramic koa censers and cups resembling
Monty Python’s Holy Grail.
Piedra Sagrada & Templo del Inca
From Cha’llapampa Village, the Chincana route continues parallel to the
beach, climbing gently along an ancient route to the isthmus at Santiago
Pampa (also known as Kasapata).
Immediately east of the trail is an odd carved boulder standing upright in a
small field. This is known as the Piedra Sagrada Offline map (Sacred Stone).
There are theories that it was used as an execution block for those convicted
of wrongdoing.
Over the track and in a field, just southwest of the Piedra Sagrada, are the
ancient walls of the complex known as the Templo del Inca (or Templo del
Sol). Although little remains of this temple, built for an unknown purpose, it
contains the only Bolivian examples of expert Inca stonework comparable to
the renowned walls found in Cuzco.
Chincana Ruins
Offline map
(admission B$10) The island’s most spectacular ruins complex, the Chincana
ruins, lies near the island’s northern tip. Its main feature is the Palacio del
Inca, a maze of stone walls and tiny doorways, also known as El Laberinto
(the Labyrinth) or by its Aymará name, Inkanakan Utapa. Within the
labyrinth there is a small well, believed by Inca pilgrims to contain sacred
water with which they would purify themselves.
About 150m southeast of the ruins is the Mesa Ceremónica (Ceremonial
Table). It’s thought to have been the site of human and animal sacrifices and
makes for a damned good picnic spot in modern times. East of the table
stretches the large rock known as Titicaca – or, more accurately, Titi
Khar’ka (Rock of the Puma) – which is featured in the Inca creation legend.
The name is likely to derive from its shape, which, when viewed from the
southeast, resembles a crouching puma.
Three natural features on the rock’s western face also figure in legend.
Near the northern end is one dubbed the Cara de Viracocha (Face of
Viracocha) – your guide will point it out with the help of a mirror (and some
imagination). At the southern end are four distinctive elongated niches: the
two on the right are locally called the Refugio del Sol (Refuge of the Sun);
the ones on the left are called the Refugio de la Luna (Refuge of the Moon).
According to tradition it was here during the Chamaj Pacha (‘times of flood
and darkness’) that the sun made its first appearance, and later Manco Capac
and Mama Ocllo appeared and founded the Inca Empire.
Immediately south of the rock you’ll pass the Huellas del Sol (Footprints
of the Sun). These natural markings resemble footprints and have inspired
the notion that they were made by the sun after its birth on Titi Khar’ka.
If you’ve the energy, climb nearby Cerro Uma Qolla for a great view.
A BOLIVIAN ATLANTIS?
At low tide an innocuous-looking column of rock peeps just a few centimeters above Lake
Titicaca’s surface, north of Isla del Sol. Most locals dismiss it as a natural stone column, similar
to many others along the shoreline. In 1992 stone boxes containing artifacts (including several
made of pure gold) were discovered at the underwater site known as Marka Pampa
Offline map (aka La Ciudad Submergida). In 2000 and 2004 further excavations near the site
revealed a massive stone temple, winding pathways and a surrounding wall, all about 8m
underwater. Although it remains unclear who was responsible for the structures, it has been
postulated that they could be as much as 6000 years old. Some even say they are the lost traces of
Atlantis. Investigations – and conspiracy theories – are ongoing.
LODGE
CABIN
Sleeping
The most scenic place to stay is Yumani – high on the ridge – where
guesthouses are growing faster than coca production. Cha’llapampa and
Cha’lla have basic options. Hotels often close or shut down for weeks on
end, so plan on being flexible. If camping, it’s best to ask permission from
the local authority and then set up away from villages, avoiding cultivated
land (a nominal payment of B$10 should be offered).
With no cars and no roads, and just a wild series of walking paths, it can
be difficult to find the hotel you are looking for. Ask around, and try to see a
few before settling.
Water is a precious commodity. The island does not yet have access to
water mains and supplies are carried by person or donkey. Bear this in mind;
think twice before taking showers (after all, we’re all in – and on! – the same
boat).
Note that in high season (June to August and during festivals) prices listed
here may double.
YUMANI
La Estancia Ecolodge $$$
Offline map
( 2-244-2727; www.ecolodge-laketiticaca.com; s/d incl breakfast & dinner
US$150/200) Magri Turismo’s delightful adobe cottages are set above preInca terraces facing snow-capped Illampu. They are authentically ecological
with solar-powered showers, sun-powered hot-boxes for heaters and Aymará
thatched roofs. La Estancia is a 15-minute walk from Yumani.
Palla Khasa $$
Offline map
( 7321-1585; palla-khasa@hotmail.com; s/d incl breakfast B$150/250)
About 300m north of Yumani proper, this top choice has lovely grounds,
simple (but workable) rooms – we like número 3 the best – funky carvedwood bedstands and remarkably low ceilings. Work is underway to build
new larger huts. The solar-heated water is good all night long. The restaurant
is highly recommended.
CABIN
HOTEL
HOTEL
HOTEL
HOTEL
Las Cabañas $$
Offline map
(s/d incl breakfast B$80/160) Perched on the hill leading into town from the
dock, these simple adobe bungalows afford great views and have 24-hour
hot water. The beds are nice and soft.
Hostal Puerta del Sol $
Offline map
( 7195-5101; s with/without bathroom B$150/40, cabin per person B$150,
d B$200) On the promontory on top of the hill, this friendly option has good
views from most rooms (number 14 is awesome), clean sheets and a nice
terrace. The rooms with bathrooms are much better, and the Andean textiles
add a nice touch. Passive solar heating in the cabins helps keep you warm at
night. They have a serious bug problem in the garden areas.
Hotel Imperio del Sol $
Offline map
(r per person with/without bathroom B$60/30) This peachy and central place
on the hillside running into town is a good bet, with clean rooms and
friendly, reliable service.
Hostal Illampu $
Offline map
(r per person without bathroom B$25) Halfway up the hill into town, this
budget option has excellent views and decent rooms – though the shared
bathrooms are quite basic. The locks on the doors do not look very secure;
single female travelers may wish to go elsewhere.
Hostal Templo del Sol $
Offline map
( 7351-8970; r per person with/without bathroom B$80/30) This basic
option at the top of the hill was being renovated at the time of visiting, but
should have decent options.
HOTEL
HOSTEL
HOTEL
HOTEL
HOTEL
Hostal Inti Wayra $
Offline map
(r per person from B$45) The amicable and rambling Inti Wayra affords
great views from most rooms; these vary a great deal – some are larger and
more open. This hotel isn’t always open.
Inti Wasi Lodge $
Offline map
( 7196-0223; museo_templodelsol@yahoo.es; dm per person B$25, cabins
per person incl breakfast B$70) Four basic but cozy cabins with en suites,
smashing views and a recommended restaurant, Palacio de la Trucha,
attached. To get here, turn right just before Hostal Illampu as you head up
the hill.
Inka Pacha $
Offline map
( 289-9160; hostellingbolivia@yahoo.com; r per person B$25, s/d/tr incl
breakfast B$70/140/200) What this HI-affiliated place lacks in luxury (read:
simple rooms), it makes up for in friendliness and service. The airy,
communal area is a nice spot to meet fellow travelers.
Inti Kala Hostal $
Offline map
( 7194-4013; javierintikala@hotmail.com; r per person incl breakfast
B$80) This place has a massive deck and small, neat rooms. The terrace is a
hit, but many complain about the service.
CHA’LLA
Hostal Qhumphuri $
Offline map
( 7152-1188, La Paz 02-284-3534; hostalqhumphuri@hotmail.com; s/d
B$20/40) Located on the hill behind the beach at Cha’lla is the simple
family-run Hostal Qhumphuri, a mustard-colored construction that offers
clean rooms and meals for a bit more.
CHA’LLAPAMPA
The neatest of a choice of very basic options is the flowery Hostal San
Francisco Offline map (r per person B$30). It’s to the left of the landing site.
Hostal Cultural Offline map ( 7-190-0272; r per person B$35, without
bathroom B$25) behind the beach is the only option with private bathrooms.
Other budget options are on the beach behind the museum.
There are several restaurants in the village that serve good fish dishes.
Eating
There are more pizzerias in Yumani than Titicaca has trucha. We suggest
you follow your nose and taste buds, plus fellow travelers’ recommendations
(see how far your feet can take you) and choose what appeals to you. Many
midrange and top-end accommodation options have good eateries. Most
restaurants are blessed with good views and those on the ridge are special for
the sunset. Nearly all menus are identical; almuerzos and set dinners cost
between B$25 and B$30.
Getting There & Around
Boat
You can reach Isla del Sol by ferry from either Copacabana or Yampupata,
or with a guided tour.
Ferry tickets may be purchased at the ticket kiosks on the beach or from
Copacabana agencies. Boats to the northern end of the island land at
Cha’llapampa, while those going to the southern end land at either Pilko
Kaina or the Escalera del Inca near Yumani.
Launches embark from Copacabana beach around 8:30am and 1:30pm
daily. Depending on the season and the company, you may get to choose if
you get dropped at the island’s north or south (check with the agency).
Return trips leave Yampupata at 10:30am and 4pm (one way B$20) and
Cha’llapampa at 1pm (B$20).
Most full-day trips go directly north to Cha’llapampa (two to 2½ hours).
Boats anchor for 1½ hours only – you’ll have just enough time to hike up to
the Chincana ruins and back again to catch the boat at 1pm to the Escalera
del Inca and Pilko Kaina in the island’s south. Here, you’ll spend around two
hours before departing for Copa.
Half-day trips generally go to the south of Isla del Sol only.
Those who wish to hike the length of the island can get off at
Cha’llapampa in the morning and walk south to the Escalera del Inca for the
return boat in the afternoon.
Alternatively, you can opt to stay overnight or longer on the island (highly
recommended), then buy a one-way ticket to Copacabana with any of the
boat companies. Asociación Unión Marines ( Click here ) and Titicaca Tours
( Click here ) run trips here.
Walking
A more adventurous alternative is to walk to Yampupata (four to seven
hours), just across the strait, and hire a boat to the north or south of the
island.
Isla de la Luna (Koati)
POP 120 / ELEV 3808M
Legend has it that the small Island of the Moon was where Viracocha
commanded the moon to rise into the sky. The island offers an interesting
alternative (or add on) to your Titicaca odyssey. It’s way smaller, way drier
and way less touristed than its solar counterpart, and if you only have a day,
you are better off heading to the Isla del Sol. This said, for slightly more
adventurous experiences this is a good option and it’s easy enough to tack a
half-day here onto your Isla del Sol trip.
Most boats arrive on the eastern side of the island, where you’ll find a
visitor center, a hostel and artisan stands – all of which may or may not be
open. On the other side of the hill, the island’s main settlement has basic
hotels, a store, a soccer field and a small chapel.
RUIN
HIKING
Sights & Activities
Templo de las Vírgenes
Offline map
(admission B$10) The ruins of an Inca nunnery and temple dedicated to the
Virgins of the Sun – also known as Acllahuasi or Iñak Uyu – occupy an
amphitheaterlike valley on the northeast shore where most ferries drop you.
It’s constructed of well-worked stone set in adobe mortar and was where
chosen girls (believed to be around eight years old) were presented as an
offering to the sun and moon. Half of the site has been reconstructed.
Interpretive Trail
A walk up to the eucalyptus grove at the summit where shepherds graze their
flocks is rewarded by a spectacular vista of aquamarine waters, Cerro
Illampu and the entire snow-covered Cordillera Real. Signs along the trail
recount local legends (in Spanish).
Sleeping & Eating
There are three hostels in the main settlement on the east side of the island,
with ultra-basic rooms going for about B$15 to B$25 per person. Food in
town will cost about B$25 a meal. Ask around. The hotel on the east-side
tourist dock costs B$20 per person, but you miss out on the interactions of
being in the main community.
Getting There & Away
Asociación Transport Yampu Tour Lacustre Offline map ( 7-525-4675;
Yampupata) runs trips to Isla de la Luna from Yampupata.
Huatajata
This little lakefront pueblo on the road from La Paz to Copacabana is a good
kick-off point for trips to Islas Kalahuta and Pariti. Get here on the
Copacabana–La Paz bus line.
The cheapest lodging in town is the Hostal Inti Karka (r B$60). The
owner can take you to the neighboring islands. Inca Utama Hotel & Spa (
233-7533; www.crillontourstiticaca.com; s/d/ste incl breakfast
B$320/400/650; ) , run by Crillon Tours ( Click here ), offers surprisingly
luxurious resort-style rooms, guided trips to the rest of the lake and four
onsite museums.
Islas de Wiñaymarka
Lago de Wiñaymarka’s most frequented islands, Kalahuta and Pariti, are
easily visited in a half-day trip. Tourism has become an economic mainstay,
but it has not been entirely beneficial to the Kalahuta people who reside on
the islands. Behave sensitively; ask permission before taking photos and
refuse requests for money or gifts.
It’s possible to camp overnight, particularly on sparsely populated Pariti;
however, camping is not recommended on Kalahuta – you will probably
attract some criticism from locals, who believe in night spirits.
ISLA KALAHUTA
When lake levels are low, Kalahuta (‘stone houses’ in Aymará) is a
peninsula. Its shallow shores are lined with totora reed, the versatile building
material for which Titicaca is famous. By day fisherfolk ply the main bay in
their wooden boats; a few years ago you’d also have seen the totora- reed
boats and men paddling around to gather the reeds to build them, but they
are no longer used.
During Inca times the island served as a cemetery and it is still dotted with
stone chullpas (funerary towers) and abandoned stone houses. Legends
abound about the horrible fate that will befall anyone who desecrates the
cemetery and locals have long refused to live in the area surrounding the
island’s only village, Queguaya.
ISLA PARITI
This tiny island, surrounded by totora -reed marshes, made world news in
2004 when a team of Bolivian and Finnish archaeologists discovered ancient
Tiwanaku ceramics here in a small circular pit. While the American
archaeologist Wendell Bennet was the first to excavate the island in 1934,
the more recent finds uncovered some extraordinary shards and ceramics,
believed to be ritualistic offerings, and many of which are intact. Today,
many of these stunning pots and ch’alladores (vases) are displayed in the
Museo de Pariti (admission B$15), while the remainder are displayed in the
Museo Nacional de Arqueología in La Paz. These stunning exhibits reflect
the high artistic achievements of Tiwanaku potters. Don’t miss the Señor de
los patos. For that matter, don’t miss a visit here.
CULTURAL EXPERIENCES AT SANTIAGO
DE OKOLA
For an extremely genuine cultural experience, don’t miss an overnight stay at Santiago de Okola (
7154-3918; www.santiagodeokola.com; r per person all-inclusive B$160), a tiny traditional
fishing and farming community on the shores of Lake Titicaca, approximately three hours from La
Paz on the road to Apolobamba. With the support of external funding bodies, Okola has formed a
community-based agro-tourism company to conserve its rich agricultural heritage and generate
income for members. Visitors stay with families in basic but specially designated rooms and
participate in daily life. Great beaches, walks and hikes abound, including a short climb to the crest
of a magnificent rocky outcrop behind the village with spectacular lake views known as the
Sleeping Dragon. Other activities include weaving classes, a medicinal plant walk, mountain-bike
trips and Andean cooking classes (at extra cost).
Getting There & Around
Many tour agencies in La Paz offer day tours to the islands ( Click here for
more information). For a more local option, try the Spanish-speaking
Maximo Catari ( 7197-8959; Hostal Inti Karka) based in Huatajata. He
runs informative day visits to Isla Suriqui (B$200) and Isla Pariti (B$350),
including a stop at a floating island. Balsa Tours ( Click here ) and Crillon
Tours ( Click here ) also run trips in the area.
Around Lake Titicaca
HUARINA
This nondescript but pleasant little village, midway between Copacabana
and La Paz, serves as a road junction, particularly for the town of Sorata. If
you’re traveling between Sorata and Copacabana, you’ll have to get off at
the intersection with the main road (500m from the town itself) and wait
here to flag down the next bus, usually from La Paz, going in your direction.
ESTRECHO DE TIQUINA
The narrow Tiquina Straits separate the main body of Lake Titicaca from the
smaller Lago de Wiñaymarka. Flanking the western and eastern shores
respectively are the twin villages of San Pedro and San Pablo. Vehicles are
shuttled across the straits on balsas (rafts), while passengers travel across in
small launches (per person B$1.50, per car B$35 to B$40, 5am to 9pm). It
seems unlikely that a bridge will be built as the ferries ensure that locals
remain in business. Bus travelers should carry all valuables onto the launch
with them.
Small restaurants and food stalls on both sides serve people caught up in
the bottleneck of traffic. Note that, occasionally, foreigners traveling in
either direction may have to present their passports for inspection at San
Pedro, which is home to Bolivia’s largest naval base.
Top of section
     Includes »
     The Yungas
     Coroico
     El Choro Trek
     Takesi Trek
     Yunga Cruz Trek
     Chulumani
     Sorata
     El Camino del Oro (Gold Digger's Trail)
     Mapiri Trail
     Aucapata & Iskanwaya
     Cordillera Real
     Huayna Potosí
     Illimani
     Condoriri Massif
     Cordillera Apolobamba
     Charazani
     Cordillera Quimsa Cruz
The Cordilleras & Yungas
Why Go?
Caught between the Andes and the Amazon, this rugged transition zone has
just about everything you could ask for from your Bolivian adventure.
For the vertically inspired, there are glacier-capped 6000m peaks and
adrenaline-charged mountain-bike descents. Nature lovers will appreciate
the cloud forests and hillside semi-tropical Yungas towns of Chulumani,
Coroico and Sorata, where you can hike to nearby waterfalls, start your river
trip into the Amazon, go mountain biking, or simply enjoy the breeze from a
mountain hideaway.
Far off the tourist trail, the areas around the Quimsa Cruz and Cordillera
Apolobamba offer large swaths of wilderness, a few lost ruins and great
opportunities for adventure.
Everywhere in between there are treks into the past along preserved Inca
trails, wildlife watching aplenty, warm weather, cool breezes and a
pervading air of hard-won tranquility.
When to Go
May–Sep Climbing season means dry weather and good visibility.
May–Oct Trekking season is longer. In shoulder months your feet might get
wet.
Jan–May Cheaper hotels, less people and high rivers. Remote travel can be
tough.
Best Places to Eat
»Café Illampu ( Click here )
»Back-Stube Konditorei ( Click here )
Best Places to Stay
»Hotel Sol y Luna ( Click here )
»Altai Oasis ( Click here )
»Huayna Potosi Refugio ( Click here )

The Cordilleras & Yungas
Highlights
 Travel in the path of the Inca on the inspiring El Choro trek (
Click here )
 Treat yourself to a few days of warm weather, a hammock and
poolside drink in Coroico ( Click here )
 Swing over to Sorata ( Click here ) for less-traveled climbing,
hiking and biking opportunities
 Meet delicate wild vicuñas and the renowned Kallawaya healers
in the remote Cordillera Apolobamba ( Click here )
 Strap on your crampons and swing your ice ax to climb one of
the fabulous peaks of the Cordillera Real ( Click here )
 Leave the tourist trail behind for out-of-this-world adventures in
the rugged Cordillera Quimsa Cruz ( Click here )
 Suck some dust on your mountain-bike descent around Coroico
( Click here ) or Sorata ( Click here )
 Explore lost ruins at Iskanwaya ( Click here )
 Settle down for a long journey into the Amazon from the jungle
outpost of Guanay ( Click here )
 Marvel at the views and discover far-removed Andean cultures
along the Takesi trek ( Click here )
History
With its steep mountains, plunging valleys and rugged terrain, the Yungas
and Cordillera region has been slow to develop. Boom-and-bust cycles kept
the region a political backwater until the end of the first decade of the 2000s
when new emphasis on coca production brought it to the forefront of
national discourse.
The first settlers to the Yungas were inspired by economic opportunity. In
the days of the Inca Empire, gold was discovered in the Tipuani and Mapiri
valleys, and the gold-crazed Spanish immediately got in on the act. To enrich
the royal treasury, they forced locals to labor for them, and the region
became one of the continent’s most prolific producers of gold. Later, the
fertile valleys were used as the agricultural breadbasket to fuel mining
operations in the Altiplano. Today the rivers of the lower Yungas are ravaged
by hordes of wildcat prospectors and bigger mining outfits.
Coca – and cocaine – have also played a central role in the development
of the region’s modern economy. The Yungas’ coca has been cultivated since
pre-Columbian times, and much of Bolivia’s legal production (up to 12,000
hectares) takes place here. In the early days of Morales’ presidency, national
coca production grew from 24,500 hectares in 2006 to around 31,000
hectares in 2010. In the early 2010s, coca production was down, however,
according to US government reports. Nevertheless, using new refining
processes, Bolivia was actually able to increase its cocaine output during the
same period.
All this has meant new political weight for the coca growers of the region.
However, they have been unable to find a united voice, with two main
factions forming: Las Proteccionistas, the more established highland farmers
who want to defend the localized economy, and the more numerous
Nacionalistas, from newly colonized lower altitude areas who seek to
expand the coca economy. Las Proteccionistas claim that coca is the only
viable crop at the altitudes at which they live and that Morales’ policies – he
supports alternative legalized uses of coca in medicines, foods and drinks –
actually threaten their livelihoods by opening coca cultivation up to the
multitudes.
During October 2003 – the dying days of President Sánchez de Lozada’s
government – the Yungas was the scene of roadblocks and violent clashes
between police, the military and campesino (subsistence farmer) protestors
angry at the selling of the nation’s natural resources (principally gas) and the
mistreatment of the indigenous population. More than 100 tourists found
themselves trapped in the town of Sorata for over a week during the
demonstrations, until a military mission was launched to ‘rescue’ them,
sparking violent clashes that left six people dead. The fall-out from the
violence and the mismanagement of the situation led to the resignation of
Sánchez de Lozada and ultimately to the election of Evo Morales, a former
coca farmer.
Climate
The Yungas’ physical beauty is astonishing, and although the hot, humid and
rainy climate may induce lethargy, it’s nevertheless more agreeable to most
people than the chilly Altiplano. Winter rains are gentle, and the heavy rains
occur mainly between November and March. The average year-round
temperature hovers in the vicinity of 18°C, but summer daytime
temperatures in the 30s aren’t uncommon. As a result, the region provides a
balmy retreat for chilled highlanders, and is a favorite R&R hangout for
foreign travelers. The mountains of the Cordilleras, on the other hand, are
serious, lofty beasts and conditions can be extreme, with warm days and
nights that drop well below zero.
 Getting There & Around
Access is entirely overland and the region’s unpaved roads can get mucky
and washed out in the rainy season. Scheduled public transportation to many
trekking and mountaineering base camps is infrequent, so chartered private
transportation from La Paz is used more often here than in other regions of
the country.
If you are scared of heights, or just don’t have much faith in Bolivian bus
drivers, ask for an aisle seat. Roads are narrow, drops are steep and some of
the routes, such as the one to Chulumani, are particularly hairy.
Traveling between towns in the region often necessitates backtracking to
La Paz, a frustrating business.
THE COCA CONTROVERSY
The government estimates that as many as 1.2 million kilos of coca leaf are consumed monthly in
Bolivia for traditional uses such as chewing the leaf, drinking it in mate and using it in religious
ceremonies. In fact, its mild alkaloids are said to provide an essential barrier against altitude
sickness and fatigue for farm workers and miners in the highlands.
In the new constitution, Evo Morales declared coca an intrinsic part of Bolivia’s heritage and
Andean culture. Following the expulsion of the US ambassador in September 2008, the US State
Department placed Bolivia on its ‘drug blacklist’ for their unwillingness to cooperate on the drug
trafficking problem. In retaliation, Morales suspended the activities of the US Drug Enforcement
Agency in Bolivia. At a UN meeting in March 2009 he announced that Bolivia would start the
process to remove the coca leaf from the 1961 Single Convention that prohibits the traditional
chewing of coca leaf. Evo has been hard at work attempting to establish a new industry of legal
coca-based by-products such as tea, medicines and cosmetics, in hopes of creating a growing
market and boosting the income of coca growers. Some see this as opting out of the war on drugs.
But, using the motto ‘coca yes, cocaine no’, Morales has cracked down on illegal drugs; in April
2009, a new anti-corruption unit was established in Bolivia mainly to fight drug trafficking and
related crime.
THE YUNGAS
The Yungas – the transition zone between dry highlands and humid lowlands
– is where the Andes fall away into the Amazon Basin. Above the steaming,
forested depths rise the near-vertical slopes of the Cordillera Real and the
Cordillera Quimsa Cruz, which halt Altiplano-bound clouds, causing them to
deposit bounteous rainfall. Vegetation is abundant and tropical fruit, coffee,
coca, cacao and tobacco grow with minimal tending. The Yungas is
composed of two provinces in La Paz department, Nor and Sud Yungas
(oddly, most of Sud Yungas lies well to the north of Nor Yungas), as well as
bits of other provinces. Coroico and Chulumani are the main population
centers. Most people here claim Aymará descent but there is also a
noticeable afro-Bolivian population. Visitors often find the locals to be more
friendly here than in the colder Altiplano (must be the heat).
Coroico
 2 / POP 2360 / ELEV 1750M (5741FT)
With warm weather, spectacular views, good resort-style hotels for all
budgets and an infectious laid-back air, Coroico is the most visited tourist
town in the Yungas. Perched eyrie-like on the shoulder of Cerro Uchumachi,
the village commands a far-ranging view across forested canyons, cloudwreathed mountain peaks, patchwork agricultural lands, citrus orchards,
coffee plantations and dozens of small settlements. When the weather clears,
the view stretches to the snow-covered summits of Mururata, Huayna Potosí
and Tiquimani, high in the Cordillera Real.
Coroico is derived from the Quechua word coryguayco meaning ‘golden
hill.’ The town’s biggest attraction is its slow pace, which allows plenty of
time for swimming, sunbathing and hammock-swinging. The hill-walking
around here is more strolling than trekking, which appeals to stiff-legged
hikers from the Choro trail or those nursing bruised bottoms after the hectic
mountain-bike descent from La Paz.
Coroico is relatively warm year-round, but summer storms bring some
mighty downpours. Because of its ridge-top position, fog is common,
especially in the afternoon when it rises from the deep valleys and swirls
through the streets and over the rooftops. The town festival is on October 20,
and Saturday and Sunday are market days. On Monday much of the town
closes down, with most stores and restaurants reopening Tuesday morning.
The village of Yolosa is located about 7km from Coroico along the
World’s Most Dangerous Road. There are a few cool hangouts, an animal
refuge, and a steady stream of dust-caked Dangerous Road bikers who
generally end their rides here.
B1
C3
D3
C4
A2
B2
B2
C3
B2
D4
C1
B1
C3
A2
B2
B1
B1
(see 8)
(see 10)
B2
B2
B2
A2
Coroico
 Activities, Courses & Tours
1 Asociación de Guias Turismo Local de Coroico
2 Cross Country Coroico
3 El Calvario
4 El Rincón Pichilemino
5 Siria León
6 Tours 4x4
 Sleeping
7 Hostal 1866
8 Hostal El Cafetal
9 Hostal Kory
10 Hostal Sol y Luna
11 Hostal Tunqui Eye
12 Hotel Bella Vista
13 Hotel Esmeralda
14 Hotel Gloria Coroico
 Eating
15 Arco Irís
16 Back-Stube Konditorei
17 Bamboo’s Café
El Cafetal
Luna Llena
18 Restaurant La Casa
 Entertainment
19 Murcielaguitos
 Shopping
20 Blue Pine Farm
21 Madres de Clarisa Convent
Activities
HIKING
WALKING, SWIMMING
MOUNTAIN BIKING
Hiking
The Choro trek ends near Coroico. You can always do the trail backwards,
and just take a day hike.
It can get extremely hot while hiking, so carry plenty of water. You should
also bring bug spray, and consider wearing long sleeves and pants, as well as
bringing a headlamp along. Single travelers – especially women – should
check with their hotels about the security situation before heading out.
Cerro Uchumachi Walk
For pretty views head uphill toward Hotel Esmeralda and on up to El
Calvario Offline map Google map , an easy 20-minute hike. At El Calvario the
Stations of the Cross lead to a grassy knoll and chapel. There are two good
trailheads from El Calvario. The one to the left leads to the cascadas, a trio
of waterfalls 5km (or two hours’ walk) beyond the chapel – bring a guide or
travel in a group as assaults have occurred on this trail. The trail to the right
leads to Cerro Uchumachi, which affords terrific valley views.
El Vagante
A good day’s walk will take you to and from El Vagante, an area of natural
stone swimming holes in the Río Santa Bárbara. Follow the road toward
Coripata for about two hours. Turn left at a fork in the road and head steeply
downhill past Hacienda Miraflores; at the second fork, bear right (the left
fork goes to Santa Ana). After two hours along this route, which features a
stretch with some pre-Columbian terraces, you’ll reach a cement bridge.
Turn right before the bridge and follow the river downstream for 20 minutes
to a series of swimming holes and waterfalls. The water isn’t drinkable, so
carry water or purification tablets – and bear in mind that the return route is
uphill all the way!
Mountain Biking
La Paz agencies take you down the World’s Most Dangerous Road (see
boxed text, Click here )to Coroico. In town you can rent bikes from most
hotels to take you to some of the nearby attractions.
Cross Country Coroico
Offline map Google map
( 7157-3015; www.cxccoroico.lobopages.com; Pacheco 2058) The area
around Coroico is great for mountain biking. Friendly Cross Country
Coroico offers day trips to attractions in the region for all levels of rider
from B$280 per person, including a guide and packed lunch. The office is
sometimes closed and, according to readers, service can be a bit
disorganized.
White-Water Rafting
About three hours north from Coroico is the Río Coroico, which flows
through the Nor Yungas. This is the country’s most popular commercially
rafted river, and is the most convenient to La Paz. The river features well
over 30 rapids, great surfing holes, dramatic drops and challenging technical
maneuvers (most of these can be scouted from the river and from several
bridges). It alternates between calm pools and 50m to 900m rapids, with
sharp bends, boils, mean holes, undercurrents, sharp rocks and rather
treacherous undercuts.
The white water normally ranges from Class II to IV, but may approach
Class V during periods of high water (when it becomes too dangerous to
raft). There are few spots to take out and rest, so stay focused and be
prepared for surprises.
Access is from the highway between Yolosa and Caranavi; the best put-ins
are a 20-minute drive north of Yolosa and near the confluence with the Río
Santa Bárbara, a 50-minute drive north of Yolosa. Just look for any track that
winds down from the road toward the river and find one that provides
suitable access. Trips average three to five hours. For the take-out, look on
the right side of the river for a devastated steel bridge (destroyed in a 1998
flood) across a normally diminutive creek. Don’t miss it because after this
the climb to the road up the steep jungled slopes is practically impossible,
and it’s a long, long way to the next possible exit.
The Río Huarinilla flows from Huayna Potosí and Tiquimani down into
the Yungas to meet the Río Coroico near Yolosa, and is best accessed from
Chairo, at the end of El Choro trek. Although it’s normally Class II and III,
high water can swell it into a much more challenging Class IV to V. The fullday trip is best suited to kayaks and narrow paddle rafts. The new Yungas
GUIDED TOUR
GUIDED TOUR
Hwy passes right by the take-out at the confluence of the Ríos Huarinilla and
Coroico.
The white water is great, but unfortunately the high tourist season
coincides with the dry season. Several agencies in La Paz and around
Coroico’s plaza offer day-long rafting trips for B$250 to B$350 per person.
Check out the Downhill Madness Offline map Google map ( 231-2628, 239-
1810; www.madness-bolivia.com; Sagárnaga 339; 8am-8pm) website for
information on a recently launched kayaking school.
Tours
Asociación de Guias Turismo Local de Coroico
Offline map Google map
( 7-306-9888; Plaza García Lanza; 8am-noon & 2:30-7:30pm) Stop
here for good tourist info or to hire a guide to local attractions. Guide
services including transit cost B$280 to B$320 (for up to four people) for
local day-trip attractions.
Tours 4x4
Offline map Google map
( 7-371-9251; cosingis@hotmail.com; Cuenca 22) As well as offering
4WD tours, it also has fun trips to a zipline (B$170), remote swimming
holes (B$70) and waterfalls.
THREE GREAT DAY TRIPS FROM
COROICO
Coroico is a good launching point for day trips or longer excursions into the neighboring
countryside. By staying the night out of town, you are doing your small part to spread your
tourist dollars and support local businesses.
La Senda Verde Refugio Natural ( 7472-2825; www.sendaverde.com; Yolosa; admission
B$49, reservations required, children under 10 not admitted; 10am-12:30pm) This 12-hectare
animal refuge is located just 500m south of Yolosa (about 7km from Coroico). You can volunteer
here (two-week minimum) for B$1050 per week, including three meals, or head over for the day
LANGUAGE COURSE
LANGUAGE COURSE
for an hour-long tour. The refuge provides a sanctuary for animals that have been rescued from
illegal traffickers. Approximately 50,000 exotic animals are illegally exported from Bolivia each
year, with around 6000 being trafficked annually within the country, according to Animales SOS.
Just one out of every 10 animals survives the ordeal. At the Senda Verde refuge, the monkeys are
the indisputable stars of the show, and most are free to wander about the grounds, jump on you,
steal your wallet (you’ll need to check your wallet, watch and glasses before you enter the
monkey area) and generally get up to lots of monkey business. There are over 70 monkeys in the
refuge, including spider, squirrel, capuchin, red howler and nocturnal varieties. Toucans, caimans,
Andean bears (only overnight guests get to see the bears; see the resort ( Click here ) for more
information), ocelots and margay are among the other wild residents. There’s a nice buffet-style
restaurant (Reyes Ortíz; snacks B$5) on site.
Zip the Flying Fox ( 2231-3849; www.ziplinebolivia.com; Yolosa; one trip B$255; 9-
11am & 1-5pm) Three zipline sections take you flying through the forest canopy near Yolosa at
speeds of up to 85km per hour. The 1500m zipline can be combined with trips down the World’s
Most Dangerous Road. Book your ticket at a La Paz or Coroico agency.
Poza Esmeralda y Turquesa Book a trip with a Coroico agency for an afternoon swim in this
‘secret’ spot.
Courses
Siria León
Offline map Google map
( 7-195-5431; siria_leon@yahoo.com; private lesson per hr B$40)
Coroico is a relaxed place to learn Spanish. A recommended teacher is Siria
León. Call or email to book your class.
El Rincón Pichilemino
Offline map Google map
( 7-190-7301; www.spanishschoolcoroico.com; 200m past the hospital)
This well-publicized school also has accommodations.
Sleeping
On weekends from June to August hotels are often booked out. It’s possible
to make advance reservations, but there’s no guarantee that all hotels will
honor them. On holiday weekends prices may increase by as much as 100%.
RESORT
RESORT
HOTEL
Around the tiny village of Yolosa (about 7km from Coroico) there are
several ecolodges worth checking out.
COROICO
Hostal Sol y Luna $
Offline map Google map
( 7373-1232, in La Paz 2-244-0588; www.solyluna-bolivia.com; campsite
B$30, s/d B$120/200, without bathroom B$70/100, d apt or cabañas B$260-
300; ) Set on a jungle-covered hill, this inspiring spot offers appealingly
rustic accommodations in a variety of cabañas (cabins), simple dorms and
camping spots. The rambling six-hectare grounds includes two pools, a small
hot tub, a children’s play area, secluded bungalows and enchanted forests.
Many cabins come with their own kitchens, and there’s also a top-tier onsite
restaurant. It’s a bit out of town, making this a better bet for the non-party
crowd. Yoga and massage are also available. It’s a 20-minute uphill walk
from town, or a B$15 taxi gets you to and from the main plaza.
Hotel Esmeralda $
Offline map Google map
( 213-6017; www.hotelesmeralda.com; Julio Suazo s/n; s/d B$216/360,
dm/s/d without bathroom B$75/120/200; ) A top pick for backpackers
and the party set, this resort-style hotel on the hillside overlooking town has
amazing grounds, tremendous views, a swimming pool and a fun traveler
scene. There’s a room for all tastes, from cheap dorms to larger digs with
balconies and private bathrooms. The rooms with shared bathrooms can be a
bit dark. A book exchange and onsite restaurant mean you may never leave
the hotel.
Hostal Kory $
Offline map Google map
( 7156-4050; Kennedy s/n; r per person with/without bathroom B$140/70;
) Right in the center of town, this is one of your best budget bets. There
are fabulous views of the valley and Cordillera peaks from the large pools or
rooms in the rambling six-story complex. The rooms have older sheets, but
HOTEL
RESORT
HOTEL
HOTEL
are clean. They can be a bit musty at first. Check to see if the pool is open to
nonguests.
Hotel Bella Vista $$
Offline map Google map
( 213-6059; coroicohotelbellavista@hotmail.com; Héroes del Chaco s/n; r
per person without bathroom B$65, s/d incl breakfast B$125/205; ) The
views truly are something to behold, and while the sheets are getting a little
thin, you’ll love the bright colors, firm mattresses (an oddity in Coroico),
cast-iron furniture, and… oh yeah, the views!
Hotel El Viejo Molino $$$
( 279-7329; www.hotelviejomolino.com; s/d/tr/q incl breakfast
B$300/420/550/650; ) Coroico’s most luxurious option is a 15-minute
downhill walk northeast of town on the road toward the Río Santa Bárbara.
All the carbon-copy resort-style rooms have firm beds, clean lines and plenty
of space. The pool has wonderful views, as do many rooms, but you are a
little secluded from town.
Hostal Tunqui Eye $
Offline map Google map
( 7490-6666; coroico_eye@yahoo.com; Iturralde 4043; r per person
with/without bathroom B$40/30; ) In the ultra-budget spectrum, this recent
entrant has newer beds, clean(ish) sheets and good views from the terrace. A
small tiki bar adds to the ambience.
Hostal El Cafetal $
Offline map Google map
( 7193-3979; Miranda s/n; r per person with/without bathroom B$70/50;
) Out of town by the hospital, this hotel has a lot of potential – with
tremendous views, a nice pool and large grounds. We just wish it were a
little better maintained. The rooms with private baths are worth the price,
while those without have soft beds and are slightly unkempt. French is
spoken.
HOTEL
RESORT
LODGE
RESORT
Hostal 1866 $
Offline map Google map
( 259-6440; www.hostal1866.net; Cuenca s/n; r per person with/without
bathroom B$65/45) Just up from the plaza, this architecturally impossible
building – a hybrid of medieval and Moorish style with turret-like corner
rooms – is a solid option for the budget set. The interior rooms are
windowless and dingy, but the rooms with bathroom are spacious, light and
breezy, especially on the higher floors. A rooftop terrace adds to the appeal.
Hotel Gloria Coroico $$
Offline map Google map
( 240-8090; www.hotelgloria.com.bo; d/tr incl breakfast B$388/464;
) At the bottom of town, this aging resort hotel has a likeable colonial
ambience, with its spacious lounges, high ceilings and grandiose halls. The
rooms are cramped and simple, but definitely passable. Make sure you get a
room on the pool/valley side, rather than the car-park side.
YOLOSA & AROUND
La Senda Verde Resort $
( 7472-2825; www.sendaverde.com; r per person incl breakfast B$120-
150; ) This delightful spot is accessed from the Yolosa–La Paz road, a
short walk from town (500m south of Yolosa). It has a verdant setting on the
banks of two rivers and is a great spot to relax. The duplex cabañas are
excellent, as is the Tarzan-meet-Jane tree house. This is a wildlife refuge (
Click here ) with animals running free. Children under 10 are not allowed
(for their own safety). Overnight visitors get to see the Andean bear, while
day visitors mostly hang out with the 70-plus monkeys that have the run of
the place.
Río Selva Resort $$
( 241-1818; r/ste/apt/cabin B$350/400/630/700; ) About 5km from
the end of the Choro trek in Pacollo is this posh five-star riverside retreat
that can be a welcome deal for larger groups. Peripheral amenities include
racquetball courts, a sauna and swimming pool. There’s a range of
LODGE
GERMAN
INTERNATIONAL
accommodations, from double rooms to cabins sleeping up to six. The
owners can arrange transportation from La Paz, but it’s much cheaper to
head to Coroico or Yolosa and get a taxi from there.
El Jiri Ecolodge $$$
( 7067-7115; www.jiribolivia.com; 2-day & 1-night program per person
B$468; ) Near Charobamba, across the valley from Coroico, this lodge is a
fun spot to stay, with hanging bridges, a zipline tour, a pool and meals under
a thatched roof. You’re kept busy with walks in Parque Nacional Cotapata
and plenty of activities. Ask to see the ruins of an old Jewish settlement
nearby. Book ahead.
Eating
The plaza is ringed by a number of inexpensive local cafes and pizzerias; all
have ordinary menus, acceptable fare and a typically tropical sense of
urgency and service.
Back-Stube Konditorei $$
Offline map Google map
(Kennedy s/n; mains B$30-50; 9:30am-2:30pm & 6:30-10pm Wed-Fri,
9:30am-10pm Sat & Sun) One of the best places to eat in town, this
welcoming bakery/restaurant has excellent breakfasts, tempting cakes and
pastries as well as pasta, vegetarian plates and memorable sauerbraten
(marinated pot-roast beef) with spätzle (German dough noodles). There’s
also a great terraced area and a book exchange.
El Cafetal $$
Offline map Google map
(Miranda s/n; mains B$15-40) This secluded hotel restaurant has unbeatable
views, as well as cane chairs and slate-topped tables where you can enjoy
some of the Yungas’ finest food. There’s a large range of dishes prepared
with a French touch. The menu includes sweet and savory crepes, soufflés,
steaks, sandwiches, curries, vegetarian lasagna and regular specials that
might include llama goulash. It’s near the hospital, a 15-minute walk uphill
from the plaza.
INTERNATIONAL
MEXICAN
CAFE
INTERNATIONAL
FONDUE
Luna Llena $$
Offline map Google map
(Hostal Sol y Luna; mains B$20-40; ) The small outdoor restaurant at the
Hostal Sol y Luna has a well-priced, tasty menu of Bolivian and European
dishes including vegetarian options. It’s a bit of a walk from town, but a
worthwhile afternoon excursion.
Bamboo’s Café $
Offline map Google map
(Iturralde 1047; mains B$20-40) This friendly candlelit Mexican restaurant
has pretty authentic guacamole, tacos, burritos and refried beans. It’s a fun
spot for a drink or two later on.
Arco Irís $
Offline map Google map
(Plaza García Lanza; B$5-10) For the best pastries in town, hit up this little
spot on the plaza. It also sells decent artesanía (locally handcrafted items).
Villa Bonita $
( 7192-2917; Héroes del Chaco s/n; mains B$12-30; 10am-6pm) This
delightfully peaceful garden cafe is 600m from town but feels a world away.
The relaxed, personable owners offer delicious homemade ice creams and
sorbets bursting with fresh fruit, tasty sundaes with unusual local liqueurs,
and an eclectic range of vegetarian dishes. Meals are served outside where
you can appreciate the valley views.
Restaurant La Casa $$
Offline map Google map
(Cuenca s/n; mains B$40-50; 6:30-11pm) While not quite what it was in
its glory days, this home-style, candlelit restaurant is still a good choice for
its friendly management and selection of fondue and à la carte meals. It also
offers small but tasty steaks, pasta dishes and a range of scrumptious
pancakes. For those with a sweet tooth there is a sinful chocolate fondue.
DANCE
FOOD & DRINK
FOOD & DRINK
Drinking & Entertainment
Most people start their night with happy-hour drinks in the town’s
restaurants. If you don’t find what you’re looking for there, head on for a
party at one of the bars in town. Ask around for the latest.
Murcielaguitos
Offline map Google map
(Pacheco s/n; Fri & Sat night) After midnight, when the restaurant bars
shut, it’s time for Murcielaguitos, in the Residencial 20 de Octubre, where
students from the agricultural college join others to dance to loud Latin
music and sing karaoke.
Shopping
Blue Pine Farm
Offline map Google map
(Tomás Monye) For natural and organic produce, snacks and other goodies.
Madres de Clarisa Convent
Offline map Google map
( 8am-8pm) The Madres de Clarisa Convent sells homemade brownies,
orange cakes, creatively flavored biscuits, and ridiculously sweet wines.
You’ll find it down the steps off the southwest corner of the plaza; ring the
bell to get into the shop area.
Information
There’s a basic regional hospital near Hostal El Cafetal, but for serious
medical treatment you’ll be better off in La Paz. There are no foreign-cardaccepting ATMs in Coroico, and not all hotels accept credit cards. For tourist
information online try www.coroico-info.com. Hotels offer laundry services
at a decent price, and most have book exchanges.
Prodem ( 213-6009; Plaza García Lanza; 8:30am-12:30pm & 2:30-
6pm Wed-Fri) Changes dollars at a fair rate and does cash advances for 5%
commission.
Tourist office (Bus Terminal; 8am-8pm) There’s also a small information
kiosk at the bus terminal.
Únete (Plaza García Lanza; per hr B$3; 10am-10pm) Offers the most
reliable internet access in town.
Getting There & Away
The La Paz–Coroico road is now open, replacing the World’s Most
Dangerous Road as the town’s access route. It’s asphalted along its whole
length, but in the short time it’s been open several landslides have cut up
some sections. Buses and micros from La Paz arrive at the bus terminal on
Av Manning. It’s a steep walk uphill to the plaza, or hop in a taxi (B$5).
Turbus Totaí ( 2289-5573) runs comfortable taxi services to La Paz from
the terminal, leaving when full (B$25, two hours).
Bicycle
An exhilarating, adrenaline-filled option is to descend by mountain bike
from La Paz to Coroico (see boxed text, Click here ). The thrilling one-day
descent from the top at El Cumbre is a memorable experience, but not for
the fainthearted. An ever-increasing number of operators run the trip.
Choose carefully – if your company cuts corners, it’s a long way down.
There have been many fatalities on this route, the vast majority caused by
over-eager bikers going too fast. However, if you’re sensible and follow
instructions, there’s no great risk.
Bus
From the Villa Fátima area in La Paz, buses and micros leave for Coroico
(B$25, 3½ hours) at least hourly from 7:30am to 8:30pm, with extra runs on
weekends and holidays. En route they stop in Yolosita, a dusty crossroads
where you can connect with buses and camiones (flatbed trucks) heading
north to Rurrenabaque (B$100, 15 to 18 hours) and further into the Bolivian
Amazon.
For Chulumani, the quickest route is to backtrack to La Paz. Although the
junction for the Chulumani road is at Unduavi, few passing micros have
spare seats at this point.
The road to Caranavi was only open 3pm to 6am at the time of writing.
Buses from the Coroico terminal will take you there (and on to other
Amazon destinations) for B$30.
El Choro Trek
The La Cumbre to Coroico (El Choro) trek, which traverses the Cordillera
Real and Parque Nacional Cotopata, is one of Bolivia’s premier hikes. It
begins at La Cumbre (4725m), the highest point on the La Paz– Coroico
highway, and climbs to 4859m before descending 3250m into the humid
Yungas and the village of Chairo (where most end up taking a taxi down to
Coroico). Along the 57km route (which is in the best condition during the
April to September dry season), you’ll note a rapid change in climate,
vegetation and wildlife as you leave the Altiplano and plunge into the forest.
Energetic hikers can finish the trek in two days, but it’s a demanding walk
more comfortably done in three days. Many people allow even more time, or
organize a stay of a few days in the albergue (basic accommodation) at
Sandillani.
Prepare for a range of climates. It can be pretty cold, even snowy, on the
first day, but you’ll soon be in sweatier climes. For the lower trail, light
cotton trousers will protect your legs from sharp vegetation and biting
insects. The Inca paving can be pretty slippery, so make sure you’ve got
shoes with grip and consider using trekking poles.
Dangers & Annoyances
Travelers have occasionally been robbed doing this trek solo, with most
thefts reported below Choro village. Though these appear to be isolated
incidents, it’s a better idea to go in a group or with a guide. Camp out of
sight if possible and do not leave anything outside your tent.
Access
Once you find the trailhead, the trail is easy to access and follow. From Villa
Fátima ( Click here ) in La Paz, catch any Yungas-bound transportation and
ask to be dropped at La Cumbre, marked by a statue of Christ, where the
trek begins.
The road climbs steeply out of Villa Fátima, and La Cumbre is less than
an hour out of La Paz, at the 4725m crest of the La Paz–Yungas road. For the
best chance of good clear views of the stunning scenery, start as early as
possible, before the mist rises out of the Yungas.
You can also take a taxi to the trail (30 minutes). One advantage of this is
that they can take you up the first bit to the pass at Abra Chucura, thus
avoiding the initial climb if you think it might cause you altitude problems.
The Route
At the statue of Christ is a park registration office where you should sign
in. Tra- ditionally this is also the place to perform the ritual cha’lla, which
asks for blessing from the gods and good luck for your journey. In former
times it was an Aymará sanctuary, which was replaced with the Christ
monument in the colonial era. In August, yatiris (traditional Aymará
medicine men) set up tents here to bless people coming from La Paz for
benedictions from the achachillas (mountain spirits). From here, follow the
well-defined track to your left for 1km then turn off onto the smaller track
that turns right and passes between two small ponds (one often dry). Follow
it up the hill until it curves to the left and begins to descend.
At this point follow the light track leading up the gravelly hill to your
right and toward an obvious notch in the barren hill before you. This is Abra
Chucura (4859m), and from here the trail runs downhill all the way to its
end at Chairo. At the high point is a pile of stones called Apacheta
Chucura. For centuries travelers have marked their passing by tossing a
stone atop it (preferably one that has been carried from a lower elevation) as
an offering to the mountain apus (sacred places). An hour below Abra
Chucura lies the remains of a tambo (wayside inn) dating from Inca times.
One hour below the tambo is the hamlet of Estancia Samaña Pampa,
where there’s a store selling water, a grassy campsite, a shelter and another
registration hut.
A short way further on, basic supplies are available at the village of
Chucura (Achura; 3600m). Here you pay a toll of B$10 for maintenance of
the trail – you will notice the difference it makes as you head on. An hour’s
walk from here leads to some campsites (per person B$10), which are found
along the river. The sites are nice, but you might wish to push on down the
beautifully paved Inca road to Cha’llapampa (2825m), a lovely village with
a roofed campsite and simple shelters approximately seven hours from the
trail’s start point. There are toilets, and water is available from a convenient
stream below a bridge close to town.
After two hours following beautiful but slippery stretches of preColumbian paving, you’ll reach a suspension bridge across the Río Chucura
at Choro (2200m). The track continues descending steadily along the true
left (west) side of the Río Chucura, where there are some small campsites
(per person B$10) and a store providing drinks and snacks.
From the ridge above Choro, the trail alternately plunges and climbs from
sunny hillsides to vegetation-choked valleys, crossing streams and
waterfalls. You’ll have to ford the Río Jucumarini, which can be rather
intimidating in the wet season. Further along, the trail crosses the deep gorge
of the Río Coscapa via the relatively sturdy Puente Colgante suspension
bridge.
The trail continues through some tiny hamlets, including San Francisco
and Buena Vista, which are separated by the stiff ascent and descent of the
Subida del Diablo. Some five to six hours from Choro is the remarkable
Casa Sandillani (2050m), a home surrounded by beautifully manicured
Japanese gardens with a view. You can camp here and nearby there’s also a
new community project lodge, Urpuma Ecoturismo ( 7258-4359;
urpuma@yahoo.com; dm B$80, s/d B$100/200); it’s best to book ahead.
Built from natural resources available in the area, the atmospheric wattle and
thatch rooms are comfortable. Rates include breakfast as well as a guided
walk, and dinner is also available. Even if you’re not staying, you can use
the toilets for a nominal fee. There are also several snack and soft-drink
stalls, and a clear water supply is provided by a pipe located diagonally
opposite Casa Sandillani (to the right, 20m along the main trail).
From Casa Sandillani it’s an easy 2½ hours downhill to Chairo, where
camping is possible in a small, flat, grassed area with no facilities, near the
bridge above town.
It’s possible to walk the relatively level 12km past the Río Selva Resort or
take transportation from Chairo to Yolosa (16km) and then catch an onward
service the 7km to Coroico. A few private vehicles head to Yolosa and
Coroico on most days, but beware of being charged scandalous prices. Don’t
pay more than B$170 – you could call a cab in Coroico to pick you up for
less than that. Infrequent minibuses also run the route, or you can arrange
transport with an agency in La Paz prior to departure.
Tours
A growing number of La Paz outfits ( Click here ) offer organized El Choro
treks. Most include meals, guides and camping equipment; some include the
services of porters.
Takesi Trek
Also known as the Inca Trail, the Takesi trek is one of the most popular and
impressive walks in the Andes. The route was used as a highway by the
early Aymará, the Inca and the Spanish, and it still serves as a major route to
the humid Yungas over a relatively low pass in the Cordillera Real. The
45km trail still conserves expertly engineered pre-Inca paving, more like a
highway than a walking track. It has been suggested that this paved section
was part of a long road that linked the La Paz area with the Alto Beni region.
The walk itself is demanding and takes two days, but plan on longer
because of transportation uncertainties to and from the trailheads. On the
first day you ascend to 4650m, so spend a few days acclimatizing in La Paz
before heading off. The trail is hiked by about 5000 people annually, more
than half of whom are Bolivians, and suffers from a litter problem due to its
growing popularity.
The May to October dry season is best for this trip. In the rainy season the
wet and cold, combined with ankle-deep mud, may contribute to a less-thanoptimal experience. Since the trail’s end is in the Yungas, plan on some rain
year-round.
The entire route appears on a single 1:50,000 IGM topo sheet: Chojlla –
6044-IV. A good source of information is Fundación Pueblo ( 212-4413;
www.fundacionpueblo.org; Casilla 9564, La Paz), an NGO that supports
rural development projects that encourage local self-sufficiency. The group
has done a lot of work with villagers along the trail to improve facilities. The
foundation can organize a package that includes transportation to and from
the trailheads, meals, accommodations and a guide for B$500 to B$700 per
person.
With a fully serviced lodge two-thirds of the way along the route, the hike
is easily done with just a daypack, but agencies and Fundación Pueblo can
arrange guides and mules if you want them.
Access
If you’re traveling by public transportation, your first destination will be
Ventilla. Micros leave from La Paz (B$12, three hours) hourly from 7am
until noon from the market area above Calle Sagárnaga, at the corner of
Calles Rodríguez and Luis Lara. Another option for groups is to charter a
taxi (around B$350 for up to four people) to the Choquekhota trailhead.
Most La Paz tour agencies can organize this for you or contact Fundación
Pueblo ( Click here ).
You can also take an urban micro or trufi (collective minibus that follows
a set route) from La Paz to Chasquipampa or Ovejuyo, then trek through the
beautiful Palca Canyon (and the Valle de las Ánimas) to Palca and then to
Ventilla. This will add at least one extra day to the trip, but will be a fitting
prelude to the longer trek.
Transportation between Ventilla and the San Francisco mine trailhead is
sparse. You will probably have to pay for a taxi, or hike two or three hours
uphill to the trailhead.
The Route
About 150m beyond Ventilla, turn left and take the road uphill, following the
Río Palca. After climbing for 60 to 90 minutes, you’ll reach the village of
Choquekhota. You’ll come to the access road to the San Francisco mine
after a further hour or two of uphill hiking; after crossing a stream, you’ll see
the signpost indicating the trailhead. The mine route veers left here, but
hikers should continue along the signposted track where the original preColumbian trail begins.
After an hour of climbing you’ll begin switchbacking for 30 minutes for
the final ascent, partly on superb precolonial paving, to the 4700m Apacheta
(Abra Takesi) pass. There, you’ll find the apacheta (shrine of stones) and a
spectacular view of Nevado Mururata (5868m) to the right and the plunging
valleys of the Yungas far below. Just beyond the pass you’ll see an
abandoned Mina David tunnel; wolfram and tin are mined around here.
Entry is not advisable.
From the pass the trail begins to descend sharply into the valley, passing a
series of abandoned mining camps and high glacial lakes. If daylight is on
your side, look for another lake, Laguna Jiskha Huara Huarani, to the left
of the trail midway between the pass and Takesi. The trail from here contains
some of Bolivia’s finest examples of Inca paving. A little later the trail
widens to between 6m and 8m and you will reach Inka Tambo. With five
rooms, it’s a good place to spend the night. If you prefer to push on, you’ll
next reach the ancient-looking thatched village of Takesi where there’s a hut
and campsite; you may also find villagers who can prepare simple meals of
potatoes and local trout. It is at this point that you will begin to experience
the sudden change to Yungas’ cloud forest vegetation.
Beyond Takesi the increasingly muddy trail winds downhill until it
crosses a bridge over the Río Takesi then follows the beautifully churning
river before it moves upwards and makes a long traverse around the Loma
Palli Palli, where you’re protected from steep drop-offs by a pre-Columbian
wall. Shortly after passing a particularly impressive mirador (lookout),
you’ll enter the village of Kacapi, the heart of the former colonial estancia
(ranch) that once controlled the entire Takesi valley. Most of the overseers’
dwellings have been reclaimed by vegetation, but you can still see the ruins
of the chapel, Capilla de las Nieves. Kacapi’s 10-bed Albergue Turístico
(dm B$30) and campsite are equipped with solar-powered showers. Basic
meals are also available.
After Kacapi the track drops sharply to a bridge over the Río Quimsa
Chata (which suffers varying degrees of damage each rainy season), then
climbs past a soccer field on the left to a pass at the hamlet of Chojlla. From
there the route descends to the final crossing of the Río Takesi via a concrete
bridge, marking the end of the pre-Columbian trail. It’s then a 1½-hour
trudge along an aqueduct to the ramshackle mining settlement of Mina
Chojlla (2280m), where there is a cheap alojamiento (basic
accommodations) and food stalls.
From Mina Chojlla, crowded buses leave for Yanacachi (B$3, 30 minutes)
and La Paz (B$12, three hours) at 5:30am and 1pm daily – buy your ticket
on arrival. If you can’t endure a night in Mina Chojlla (and few people can),
keep walking about one hour down the road past the headquarters of the
hydroelectric power project to the more pleasant village of Yanacachi.
Yunga Cruz Trek
This is a relatively little-trodden trek between the village of Chuñavi and the
Sud Yungas’ provincial capital, Chulumani. Declared a national monument
in 1992, it preserves good stretches of pre-Columbian footpaths and
archaeological remains dating from the Tiwanaku and Inca periods. This is
one of your best bets for wildlife watching, as there’s less traffic here than
on other treks. Keep your eyes peeled for Andean foxes, condors, and plenty
of birds and butterflies.
There are a couple of variations to the standard trek, including a pass over
the northern shoulder of Illimani to get you started, as well as an alternative
– and considerably more spectacular – route over Cerro Khala Ciudad,
which begins beyond Lambate. Some guides even offer the trek backwards,
starting at Chulumani, but that’s a fairly punishing alternative. Crossing
several passes at over 5000m, it’s easily the most demanding of the Inca
trails and usually takes five or six days. There are no official campsites along
the route, although there are plenty of spots along the way to set up camp.
If you are going to attempt this trek you’ll need to carry the 1:50,000 topo
sheets Palca – 6044-I, Lambate – 6044-II and Chulumani – 6044-III or, even
better, arrange a guide (highly recommended). Many agencies in La Paz
offer this trek, with guides, cook and pack animals.
Note that there is no water available on the last day, so stock up ahead of
time.
Access
There’s a good case for hiring a 4WD to take you to the trailhead at
Lambate. Otherwise you can go straight to Chuñavi (five hours) or Lambate
(six hours) by micro from La Paz, with departures from Calle Venancio
Burgoa, near Plaza Líbano, leaving daily at 7am.
The return to La Paz from Chulumani and Irupana is straightforward:
catch one of the many daily buses or camiones from the tranca (police post)
in Chulumani.
Chulumani
 2 / POP 2950 / ELEV 1700M (5577FT)
Perched scenically on the side of a hill, this peaceful little town is the capital
of the Sud Yungas. It’s a lot like Coroico, with a friendly town square,
bustling market and tropical attitude, but receives next to no international
visitation.
The town was founded because of the supposed healing qualities of the
mineral streams in the vicinity. However, when its fertile soils provided
bumper crops of coca (the country’s best for chewing), citruses, bananas,
coffee and cacao, Chulumani soon became more important as a trade center
for the nearby farming communities. The area is also a paradise for birds and
butterflies – there are clouds of the latter, and several endemic species of the
former. At a tropically warm and often wet altitude, Chulumani is a great
trekking base camp and a relaxing weekend retreat with a great view. The
only time its pervasive tranquility is interrupted is during the week following
August 24, when Chulumani stages the riotous Fiesta de San Bartolomé.
BOLIVIA’S INVISIBLE MINORITY
The hill villages of the Chulumani region are home to a high proportion of the country’s AfroBolivian people. There are an estimated 35,000 Bolivians descended from African slaves who
were brought to Bolivia to work in the Potosí silver mines (where an astronomical number of
them died working 12-hour shifts and living underground for up to four months continuously).
Because of the high death rate, slaves were three times more expensive than local labor by the
time they reached Potosí, and it wasn’t long before the Spaniards transferred them to domestic
labor and farm work.
Simón Bolívar’s original Bolivian constitution technically ended the practice of slavery, but
slaves were still indebted to their owners, and it wasn’t until 1851 that they became ‘free’. After
the abolishment of slavery, many Afro-Bolivians settled (or were forcibly settled) in the Yungas
region, where they worked in a hacienda system. They could not own land, and were virtually
enslaved under a sharecropper-style system for another 100 years. While Afro-Bolivians were
never fully assimilated into local culture – and have always been one of Bolivia’s most
marginalized communities both economically and politically – they did pick up the Aymará
language and Afro-Bolivian women adopted the traditional dress of the Aymará. They are
recognized by Bolivia’s new constitution, but still lack a voice on the national stage.
In their haunting saya music (a hybrid of African, Aymará and Spanish styles) and distinct
funerary rites, you will see distinct African overtones. See a documentary on how AfroBolivian’s are using saya music as a form of social protest at www.solidarityinsaya.com.
One of the traditional Bolivian dances, the morenada, has its roots in a portrayal of an African
slave train arriving at the mines. More information about Afro-Bolivians can be found on the
websites for Fundación Activos Culturales Afro (www.programaacua.org, in Spanish) and
Fundación Praia (www.fundapraia.org, in Spanish).
Sights & Activities
Chulumani sees few visitors, but it is a good base for several worthwhile
excursions.
There are some lovely walks in the Chulumani area. A five-hour (oneway) downhill hike through clouds of butterflies will take you from
Chulumani to the Río Solacama; you can easily get a bus or micro back. In
three to four hours you can also walk to Ocabaya. Other walks take you from
the higher village of Villa Remedios to the lower one, or from Chicaloma
down to Ocabaya. Another beautiful hike is the four-hour walk from
Chulumani to Chirca, where there’s the church of a revered local virgin.
WILDLIFE RESERVE
HOTEL
LODGE
HOTEL
Apa-Apa Reserva Ecológica
( 7254-7770; apapayungas@hotmail.com) An interesting day trip is to the
Apa-Apa Reserva Ecológica, 8km from Chulumani. The private 500-hectare
property has dry forest and one of the last remnants of primary cloud forest
in the Yungas, and is rich in trees, orchids, butterflies and birds. The reserve
runs four-hour guided forest walks (per person B$50 with a B$200
minimum) and has a cafe serving meals and homemade ice cream. A taxi
from Chulumani to the reserve costs B$15.
Sleeping
Country House $
(Tolopata 13; r per person incl breakfast B$70; ) Probably your best bet in
town, this welcoming country home is 10 minutes west of the plaza by the
basketball court and the lookout Mirador La Ladera. The rooms, decorated
in an attractively rustic style, are spotless, and have hot-water bathrooms and
fresh flowers. Great breakfasts, abundant birdlife, a pool table and an
extensive movie collection are other highlights, as are the delicious homecooked dinners and relaxing mineral pool. Owner Javier can organize all
sorts of local excursions including inner-tubing on local rivers.
Apa-Apa Reserva Ecológica $
( 7254-7770; apapayungas@hotmail.com; r per person B$50, campsites
B$70 plus per person per night B$15; ) This beautiful old adobe hacienda
makes a good place to stay. It’s set in elegant grounds, and the cordial
owners maintain the property with care and thought. There’s an excellent
grassy camping area with palm-thatched tables, barbecues and good
bathroom facilities, as well as five rooms, a cafe-restaurant and a lovely
pool. It’s 8km from Chulumani.
Hostal Dion $
( 289-6034; hostaldion@hotmail.com; Bolívar s/n; r per person
with/without bathroom incl breakfast B$70/50) Half a block south of Plaza
Libertad, this is the best of the central options. The homey setting includes
extremely clean rooms, cable TV, electric showers and sparkling tile floors.
HOTEL
LODGE
Hotel Monarca $
( 7726-2112; r per person B$75; ) Like most ex-prefectural holiday
camps, the Monarca is a bit run-down and lacks character, but it’s managed
by nice people and is good value. The enormous pool is open to nonguests
for B$15. It’s about a five-minute walk downhill southwest from the plaza;
ask for directions.
Parque Ecológico Hotel El Castillo del Loro $$
( 235-9881; www.hotelcastillodelloro.com; r per person incl breakfast
B$200; ) Located along the Chulumani road (20km beyond Unduavi) at
1934m, this unique riverfront castle is a real surprise; it is a very unexpected
sight in the Yungas. It functions as a hotel and restaurant, offers access to a
100-hectare ecopark, and is only a couple of hours from La Paz. Its
swimming pool, waterfalls and subtropical climate makes for an appealing
weekend getaway.
Eating
Food choices are limited in most cases to almuerzos (set lunches) and it’s a
case of first come first served. After 2pm you’ll be hard pressed to find
anything decent to eat. For cheap and cheerful fried chicken, Restaurant
Rinconcito Chulameño on the plaza is a friendly choice – the second- story
balcony offers a bird’s-eye view over the action on the plaza. Snack San
Bartolomé is another decent option on the plaza. There are also basic
comedores (dining halls) near the tranca.
If you are looking for something more adventurous, the Country House (
Click here ) and Apa-Apa Reserva Ecológica ( Click here ) do tasty dinners
with a few hours’ notice.
Information
Chulumani’s tourist office is in a kiosk on the main plaza, but if you are
thinking of exploring the region it is worth seeking out hotel owners such as
English-speaking Javier Sarabia at the Country House. There’s no ATM in
Chulumani; Banco Fie on the main plaza may do credit card advances for
5% commission. Prodem (two blocks west of the Plaza on Pando) changes
US dollars and gives cash advances on credit cards (5% commission). The
Cotel office on Plaza Libertad is one of several central phone offices.
Internet connections are sporadic; when there is a connection, head to
Enternet (Sucre s/n).
Getting There & Away
Since the closure of the original La Paz–Coroico road to traffic, the nailbiting route from La Paz to Chulumani, which extends on to Irupana, has
claimed the title of ‘The World’s Most Dangerous Road.’ If you can keep
your nerves in check, it is actually an exceptionally beautiful route, though
it’s hard to appreciate when your bus is reversing round a blind, muddy bend
in search of a section wide enough to let oncoming traffic past.
Yunga Cruz ( Click here ) trekkers finish in Chulumani. The town is also
readily accessed from Yanacachi at the end of the Takesi trek ( Click here ).
From Yanacachi, walk down to the main road and wait for transportation
headed downhill; it’s about 1½ hours to Chulumani.
From Villa Fátima in La Paz, around the corner of Calles San Borja and
15 de Abril, different companies depart when full for Chulumani (B$20, four
hours) from 8am to 4pm. From Chulumani, La Paz–bound buses wait around
the tranca. Theoretically, there are several departures before 10am and after
4pm, but in reality services are frequently cancelled due to lack of interest.
Buy your ticket in advance; even if your company doesn’t depart it will be
valid for one of those that does.
If you’re coming from Coroico, get off at Unduavi and wait for another
vehicle. It will likely be standing-room only; if a seat is a priority, you’ll
have to go all the way back to La Paz.
It’s also possible to go to Coroico via Coripata; take a La Paz–bound bus
and get off at the crossroads just after Puente Villa at Km 93. Here, wait for
a bus or camión to Coripata and then change again for a lift to Coroico. It’s a
long and dusty but worthwhile trip. An easier option is to hire a taxi; expect
to pay B$300 for the trip to Coroico for up to four people.
Around Chulumani
The area around Chulumani is a beautiful, fertile zone with patches of intact
cloud forest and plenty of farms producing coca, coffee, bananas and citrus
fruits. Walking, biking or busing your way between the small colonial- era
towns of the region is an interesting experience.
An intriguing circuit takes you from Chulumani past the Apa-Apa Reserva
Ecológica ( Click here ) toward the humble fruit-farming hamlets of Villa
Remedios. There are two villages, a higher and a lower one; the latter has a
pretty little church. Look out for coca leaves being harvested and dried (and
remember that while much coca production in the region is legal, farmers
may be sensitive about pictures or lots of questions).
The main road winds its way down to the Río Solacama, whose banks are
populated by numerous butterflies; it’s a lovely spot to bathe on a hot day.
Just after the bridge, a left turn heads away from the main road up a steep
hill to Laza. A via crucis (Stations of the Cross) leads up to the pretty square
and its church, where there’s an appealing dark-wood and gold altarpiece
and baldachin. The much-revered statue of Christ, El Señor de la Exaltación,
is the destination for an important romería (pilgrimage-fiesta) on September
14.
The main settlement over this side of the river is Irupana, an attractive,
sleepy colonial town founded in the 18th century on one of the few bits of
flat ground in the area. It became an important fortress, just as the nearby
ruins of Pasto Grande had once been in Tiwanaku and Inca times.
From Irupana, you can head back to Chulumani a different way, fording
the Río Puri and passing through the principal Afro- Bolivian town, dusty
Chicaloma – known for its annual town festival on May 27, which features
lots of traditional saya music (a hybrid of African, Aymará and Spanish
styles) – before crossing the Río Solacama again. On the way back, you pass
through tiny, postcard-pretty Ocabaya, which has one of the oldest churches
in Bolivia, fronted by a liberty bell and a memorial to two local martyrs of
the struggle for campesino (subsistence farmer) rights. Locals may well offer
food in their homes here.
Javier Sarabia at the Country House in Chulumani will happily give
walking information (even for nonguests) and can help arrange taxi dropoffs or pick-ups.
LODGE
HOTEL
Activities
The road to Chulumani follows part of another good river for white-water
rafting, the Río Unduavi. The upper section ranges from essentially
unnavigable Class V to Class VI, with steep chutes, powerful currents, large
boulder gardens, blind corners and waterfalls. Beyond this section it mellows
out into some challenging Class IV white water followed by Class II and III
rapids. Access is limited, but the Chulumani road does offer several put-ins
and take-outs. The best access points have been left by construction crews
who’ve mined the riverbanks for sand and gravel. A good take-out point is
Puente Villa, which is three to four hours below the best put-ins. La Paz tour
operators ( Click here ) can help arrange a guided trip.
Sleeping
In addition to a few cheap alojamientos (basic lodgings) – Sarita on
Irupana’s main street is the cleanest – Irupana has a couple of interesting
options for accommodations.
Posada Nirvana Inn $$
( 213-6154; www.posadanirvanainn.com; cabañas per person incl
breakfast B$180; ) One of the most memorable places to stay in the
Yungas is Posada Nirvana Inn in the barrio of Chiriaca at the top of Irupana
(go past the soccer field and turn right). It consists of five sublime cabañas
(cabins) in an immaculate hillside garden full of orange and mandarin trees
with top views over the valley. It’s run by considerate hosts, and the rooms
are well looked after – comfortable and romantic with a log fire – and there
are optional kitchen facilities. There’s also a swimming pool and sauna. Staff
can arrange forest walks.
Hotel Bougainvillea $
( 213-6155; Sucre 243; r per person B$70; ) The Hotel Bougainvillea is
an attractive, modernized, whitewashed building built around a pool. Its
rooms are clean and appealing, although management is not overly
welcoming.
Getting There & Away
Regular buses drive the 31km from Chulumani to Irupana (B$3, one hour)
and there are also some direct connections to Irupana from La Paz. Micros
run to the smaller villages from Chulumani and Irupana.
One of the most comfortable ways to see the places in this region is to hire
a taxi from Chulumani (although not in the rainy season, December to
February). For the whole circuit, expect to pay around B$200 to B$300 for a
day’s hire. It’s worth getting hold of a driver who can also act as a guide; ask
Javier Sarabia at the Country House in Chulumani for a recommendation.
Sorata
 2 / POP 18,932 / ELEV 2670M (8759FT)
Sorata is the town that tourism forgot. Once rivaling Coroico for weekend
visitors, this picturesque colonial village perched on a hillside beneath the
towering snow-capped peaks of Illampu and Ancohuma is slowly falling into
decay. Restaurants and hotels are going out of business, tour operators are
jumping ship and trash isn’t getting picked up. Every day it’s becoming less
touristy and, well… more Bolivian.
And while it doesn’t have the shiny digs of its arch nemesis Coroico, this
semi-tropical village sitting high above a verdant agricultural valley does
offer great weather, access to some of Bolivia’s best treks, kick-ass downhill
mountain biking and an atavistic air that may just become intoxicating.
In colonial days Sorata provided a link to the Alto Beni’s goldfields and
rubber plantations, and a gateway to the Amazon Basin. In 1791 it was the
site of a distinctly unorthodox siege by indigenous leader Andrés Tupac
Amaru and his 16,000 soldiers. They constructed dykes above the town, and
when these had filled with runoff from the slopes of Illampu, they opened
the floodgates and the town was washed away.
So why the decline? In September 2003, Sorata hit the national headlines.
A blockade further up the La Paz road – expression of an overwhelming
wave of campesino dissatisfaction that eventually led to the downfall of the
government – trapped hundreds of Bolivian and foreign tourists in Sorata. In
a show of force, the army busted them out, killing a campesino and inducing
a riot. Tourism dropped off in the wake of this, and the town hasn’t been able
to recover. These days, mining and coca production (and it’s value-added
industries) seem to be the main sources of employment in and around Sorata.
Sorata
(see 9)
C3
C3
C1
A2
C3
C3
C1
A2
C3
C3
B3
C3
C3
C3
HISTORIC BUILDING
 Sights
Casa Günther
1 Plaza General Enrique Peñaranda
 Activities, Courses & Tours
2 Asociación de Guías de Sorata
 Sleeping
3 Hostal Las Piedras
4 Hostal Mirador
5 Hostal Panchita
6 Hostal Paraíso
7 Hotel Santa Lucia
8 Reggae House
9 Residencial Sorata
 Eating
10 La Casa del Turista
11 Mercado
12 Restaurant Jalisco
 Transport
13 Micros to La Paz
14 Sindicato de Transportes Unificada Sorata
Sights
There isn’t much of specific interest in Sorata itself – its main attractions are
its historic ambience and maze of steep stairways and narrow cobbled lanes.
Casa Günther
Offline map
(northeast of the plaza) It’s worth taking a look at Casa Günther, a rambling,
historic mansion that now houses the Residencial Sorata. It was built in 1895
as the home of the Richters, a quinine-trading family, and was later taken
over by the Günthers, who were involved in rubber extraction until 1955.
PLAZA
CAVE
Plaza General Enrique Peñaranda
Offline map
The main square, Plaza General Enrique Peñaranda, is Sorata’s showcase.
With the town’s best view of the nevados (snow-capped mountain peaks),
it’s graced by towering date palms and immaculate gardens.
Gruta de San Pedro
(San Pedro Cave; admission B$15; 8am-5pm) Although it’s not the most
spectacular of caves, Gruta de San Pedro makes for a popular excursion. The
cave is approximately 400m deep with an enclosed lagoon, and though it is
no longer possible to swim in it, the lagoon can be crossed in pedal boats.
It’s a scenic 6km hike to the cave along a dirt road (two hours each way).
Taxis will do the return trip for around B$30, including waiting time. The
local community has also set up two simple albergues (basic
accommodations) to overnight in. There are a total of four rooms with a
single bed in each and prices are negotiable. Remember that all proceeds go
to help the community, so be generous.
Activities
Hiking
Sorata is best known as a convenient base for hikers and climbers pursuing
some of Bolivia’s finest high-mountain landscapes. The peak hiking season
is May to September.
The most popular walk is the hike to Laguna Chillata, a pretty spot with
great views of the surrounding sierra and Lake Titicaca. It’s a fairly stiff
five-hour climb, ascending some 1500m, and, while you can get there and
back in a day, it’s a pleasant and popular spot to camp. It’s worthwhile taking
a guide, as it’s easy to get lost. If you’re going to overnight there, a beast of
burden is a sound investment; let the mule do the carrying while you enjoy
the views.
An optional third day can be built into this hike. Leaving the tent and your
gear at Laguna Chillata (it’ll get nicked if you haven’t brought a guide, who
can detail someone to watch over it), a steep ascent takes you up to Laguna
Glacial, a top spot where you can watch big chunks of ice cracking off into
the water. It’s at 5100m, so take it easy; the altitude can make it a tough
climb.
Ambitious adventurers can do the seven-day El Camino del Oro trek (
Click here ), an ancient trading route between the Altiplano and the Río
Tipuani goldfields. Otherwise there’s the challenging five-day Mapiri trail (
Click here ) or the seven-day Illampu circuit.
The ultimate hardcore challenge is the 20-day Trans Cordillera route :
eight days gets you from Sorata to Lago Sistaña, with possible four-day (to
Huayna Potosí) and eight-day (to Illimani) extensions.
Basic information on climbing some of the region’s peaks is included
under Cordillera Real. Hikers should carry the Alpen- vereinskarte
Cordillera Real Nord (Illampu) 1:50,000 map, available online or maybe at
Buho’s Internet & Café ( Click here ) in town.
While it’s possible to hike independently, it is best to hook up with a
guide, mainly because of the need to be aware of local sensibilities and the
difficulty of finding passable routes.
The most economical, authorized option is to hire an independent,
Spanish-speaking guide from the Asociación de Guías de Sorata Offline map
(Sorata Guides & Porters Association; 213-6672;
guiasorata@hotmail.com; Sucre 302), which also rents equipment of
varying quality and arranges many different treks. Expect to pay around
B$300 to B$400 per day for a guide (and mule to carry your equipment).
Cooking equipment is included in these prices, but food is extra. Clients are
expected to pay for the guide’s food.
WARNING: HIKING NEAR SORATA
With Sorata’s economy turning from tourism to mining and farming, there are fewer guides
offering services here, and fewer pack animals for hire. Reports indicate that this could be a
dangerous area for trekking and many agencies are no longer offering treks in the region. The El
Camino de Oro trek is reportedly seeing little traffic these days, meaning you’ll have to clear the
trail with a machete and may face some tough locals along the way. The Mapiri trek has an even
rougher record, with increased reports of robberies. The villages along the way are now charging
passage fees and are said to have become quite aggressive with those who do not pay.
To stay safe, check with the guide service, your local hotel and fellow travelers before heading
out. In this region and the Cordillera Apolobamba, it is recommended that you travel in groups
MOUNTAIN BIKING
LODGE
and with a guide.
Mountain Biking
The Sorata area, with its thrillingly steep descents and spectacular mountain
scenery, makes it a top two-wheel destination. The Jach’a Avalancha
(Grand Avalanche) Mountain Bike race takes place in Sorata each year.
This is the biggest downhill race course in South America based on the
Mega Avalanche format. It is a 2000m descent using a mass start and draws
riders from across Bolivia and the world. One of the best trips around is the
descent into the town from the mountains astride Lake Titicaca. From La
Paz, take a Sorata-bound bus to the pass north of Achacachi and then choose
either the main road or any of the downhill routes along unpaved roads.
Most routes eventually lead to Sorata – or come at least in view of it (but as
some don’t it’s wise to have a map). Throughout the ride you’re presented
with superb views of towering snow-capped peaks, plunging valleys and tiny
rural villages. The Reggae House may have bikes for rent.
Andean Epics
( 7127-6685; www.andeanepics.com) This La Paz–based operator is your
best bet for rides near Sorata. Its signature trip combines two days of riding
with three days on motorized dugout canoes from Sorata to Rurrenabaque
(B$2500 per person, all inclusive). It was moving at the time of writing, so
check the website for the new location.
Sleeping
 Altai Oasis $$
( 7151-9856; www.altaioasis.lobopages.com; camp- sites B$30, s/d
B$245/315, dm/s/d without bathroom B$84/125/250, cabin B$500-800;
) This really does feel like an oasis, with a lush garden, hammocks, caged
macaws, a pretty balcony cafe-restaurant and a range of accom modations
options. The beautiful riverside retreat offers grassy campsites, comfortable
rooms, and romantic accommodations in appealingly rustic cabañas, each
one intricately and fancifully painted. We only wish they’d update their
HOTEL
HOTEL
HOTEL
HOTEL
slumping mattresses. To get there, follow the downhill track past the soccer
field to the river, climb back up to the road and turn left before reaching
Café Illampu.
Hotel Santa Lucia $
Offline map
( 7151-3812; r per person with/without bathroom B$50/40) Located near
the soccer field, this is the cleanest, neatest option in town. The bright
yellow hotel does have a slightly institutional feel, but in return you get
excellent mattresses (by Sorata standards), crisp lines and tidy shared
facilities. The owner is as friendly as it gets.
Hostal Las Piedras $
Offline map
( 7191-6341; laspiedras2002@yahoo.de; Ascarrunz s/n; s/d/tr
B$100/140/180, s/d without bathroom B$50/80) This German-owned joint
has amazing views from most rooms, a cool vibe, shared kitchen and fun
common area. The sheets are clean, but the mattresses and pillows are paperthin. The optional breakfast includes homemade wholemeal bread and
yogurt.
Hostal Paraíso $
Offline map
( 7302-3447; Villavicencio s/n; r per person B$40) This central spot has a
bright, flowery patio, a series of roof terraces with nice views, new beds and
old carpets, and decent rooms with private bathrooms and circumspect
electrical wiring on the showers.
Residencial Sorata $
Offline map
( 2213-6672; r per person with/without bathroom B$35/25) On the
northeast corner of the plaza, this ultra-characterful colonial-style mansion
makes a romantic place to stay. Do your eyes a favor and ask to see the oldstyle rooms; do your back a favor and ask to stay in one of the new ones
HOTEL
HOTEL
HOTEL
BAKERY
(with private bathroom). There’s a restaurant, laundry service, wild garden
and a friendly welcome. This is a good spot to gather info on local hikes.
Hostal Panchita $
Offline map
( 7120-5651; r per person without bathroom B$30) Built around a clean
and sunny courtyard on the south side of the plaza, the Panchita has dark
cell-like rooms with shared baths. At least the management is friendly,
there’s hot water, and you are right on the plaza.
Hostal Mirador $
Offline map
( 2878-5078; Muñecas 400; r per person with/without bathroom B$60/30)
If you’ve got OCD, head somewhere else, fast! This place is quite cluttered.
That said, there’s a tremendous terrace, shared kitchen and decent rooms
with caved-in beds. The atmosphere can be a little unfriendly.
Reggae House $
Offline map
( 7323-8327; Muñecas s/n; r per person B$20-25) There’s a definite
relaxed vibe at the aptly named Reggae House. Sorata-farians will love the
wonderful terrace for guitar jams and drum circles, while the tiny rooms
with single beds leave something to be desired. The whole place is rather
dirty, but, hey, that’s part of the deal, right? It also has a shared kitchen, and
staff can sometimes arrange bike or horse trips.
Eating
 Café Illampu $
(snacks B$20-35; 9am-6:30pm Wed-Mon) A 15-minute down-and-up
walk from town, this lovely relaxing spot is en route to the Gruta de San
Pedro. Stop in on the return journey – if you stop on the way to the cave, you
might not make it as Café Illampu is exceedingly tranquil with views, a
garden and llamas. It also offers good coffee, sandwiches on homemade
INTERNATIONAL
MARKET
INTERNATIONAL
MEXICAN
bread and great cakes – the Swiss owner is a master baker. You can camp
here for B$18.
Altai Oasis $$
(mains B$20-50; ) The peaceful balcony restaurant at this lovely retreat,
15 minutes’ walk from town, serves coffee, drinks and a range of vegetarian
dishes. There are also T-bone steaks and, for an Eastern European touch,
Polish borscht and tasty goulash. It’s a great place to just sit with a drink too,
with views over the valley and the tinkle of wind chimes.
Mercado $
Offline map
(Muñecas s/n; mains B$5-20) Head to the market to grab the goods for a
picnic lunch. There’s some food stands here, too.
La Casa del Turista $$
Offline map
(Plaza Enrique Peñaranda s/n; mains B$25-35) This friendly eatery offers
the best pizza on the plaza, traditional international favorites like pasta and
tacos, along with a few tried-and-true Bolivian treats like pique macho (beef
chunks and sausages over French fries with lettuce, tomatoes, onions and
spicy locoto peppers). It’s cleaner than most restaurants in town.
Restaurant Jalisco $
Offline map
(mains B$25-30; ) On the east side of the plaza, Jalisco delivers an
ambitious menu of pizzas, Bolivian fare, pasta and creditable attempts at
Mexican food such as tacos and burritos. There’s quite a few vegetarian
options.
Drinking & Entertainment
Not a lot goes on in Sorata at night. The restaurants on the plaza are your
best bet.
Information
Sunday is market day, and Tuesday, when many businesses are closed, is
considered domingo sorateño (Sorata’s Sunday). There’s no tourist
information center or ATM.
Buho’s Internet & Café (per hr B$12) For slow and expensive internet
access; on the south side of the plaza. It also sells a small selection of local
arts and crafts.
Prodem (Plaza Enrique Peñaranda 136; 8:30am-12:30pm & 2:30-6pm
Tue-Fri, 8am-3pm Sat) Changes US dollars and does credit card cash
advances for a 5% commission.
Getting There & Away
Sorata is a long way from the other Yungas towns, and there’s no road
connecting it directly with Coroico, so you must go through La Paz via a
paved road.
From near La Paz’ cemetery, buses leave hourly between 4am and 5:30pm
(B$17, three hours). From the plaza in Sorata, La Paz–bound micros depart
when full and flotas (long-distance buses) leave on the hour between 4am
and 5pm. Sindicato de Transportes Unificada Sorata Offline map (Plaza
Enrique Peñaranda s/n) has a daily service to Copacabana (9am, B$40),
Coroico (9am, B$36), Achacachi (no set time, B$12), and Haurina (hourly,
B$15). For Copa- cabana you can also get off at the junction town of
Huarina and wait for another, probably packed, bus. Similarly, for Charazani
you should change at Achacachi, but you’ll need to start out from Sorata
very early.
Sindicato de Transportes Unificada Sorata also services the towns on the
rough 4WD track to the gold mining settlement of Mapiri, including
Quiabaya (10:30am and noon, B$15), Tacacoma (10:30am, B$15) and
Constata (9am, B$70), with no continuing service to Mapiri. The biggest
drawbacks are the horrendous mud, the road construction and some river
crossings that are passable only with a 4WD.
Camionetas (pickup trucks) leave Sorata sporadically for the grueling
journey to Consata (seven hours) and on to the Sorata Limitada mine (10
hours). From Sorata Limitada you’ll find camionetas to Mapiri, which is
another hour away.
El Camino del Oro (Gold Digger’s
Trail)
For nearly 1000 years this Inca road has been used as a commerce and trade
link between the Altiplano and the lowland goldfields. Indeed, the Tipuani
and Mapiri valleys were major sources of the gold that once adorned the
Inca capital, Cuzco.
Today, however, the fields are worked primarily by bulldozers and
dredgers owned by mining cooperatives. They scour and scrape the
landscape and dump the detritus, which is picked over by out-of-work
Aymará refugees from the highlands. Fortunately, the upper part of the route
remains magnificent, and almost everything between Ancoma and Chusi has
been left alone, including some wonderfully exhausting Inca staircases and
dilapidated ancient highway engineering.
This trek is more challenging than the Takesi and El Choro routes; if you
want to get the most from it, plan on six or seven days to walk between
Sorata and Llipi, less if you opt for a 4WD to Ancoma. At Llipi, find
transportation to Tipuani or Guanay to avoid a walking-pace tour through the
worst of the destruction.
Word of warning: this is a rough part of Bolivia, and not many people are
taking this trek at the moment. With wildcat (illegal) miners in the area, it
can be quite dangerous. Also, now that there is less regular traffic on the
trail, you’ll need to clear parts of it with machetes. If you decide to go, it’s
highly recommended that you travel with a local guide.
Access
Nearly everyone does the route from Sorata down the valley to Tipuani and
Guanay, simply because it’s generally downhill. If you don’t mind a climb,
however, you might prefer to do it in reverse, thus leaving the prettiest bits
to last. Whatever you choose to do, it is best with a guide.
There are three options for the route between Sorata and Ancoma. First,
you can rent a 4WD in Sorata and cut two days off the trek. You’ll have to
bargain but expect to pay at least B$400. A challenging alternative is the
steep route that begins near the cemetery in Sorata. The route roughly
follows the Río Challasuyo, passing through the village of Chillkani and
winding up on the road just below the Abra Chuchu (4658m) – this is also
the access to the Mapiri trail, a four-hour walk from Ancoma. The third
option, which is shorter and more scenic, is to follow the route through the
village of Lakathiya and over the Abra de Illampu (4741m) to meet up with
the road about 1½ hours above Ancoma. Foreigners are charged B$10 per
person to camp anywhere in the vicinity of Ancoma or you can ask about
lodging in the school room. There is also a B$3 charge for crossing the
bridge. Alternatively, continue a few kilometers on to Tushuaia where there
is a flat terrace that makes for excellent camping.
The Route
Once you’re in Ancoma, the route is fairly straightforward. Leave the 4WD
track and follow the southern bank of the Río Quillapituni (which
eventually becomes the Río Tipuani). At a wide spot called Llallajta, 4½
hours from Ancoma, the route crosses a bridge and briefly follows the north
bank before recrossing the river and heading toward Sumata. Another Incaengineered diversion to the north bank has been destroyed by bridge
washouts, forcing a spontaneously constructed, but thankfully brief, detour
above the southern bank.
Just past the detour is the village of Sumata; just beyond, a trail turns off
to the north across the river and heads for Yani, which is the start of the
Mapiri trail. A short distance further along from the trail junction is Ocara.
From here, the path goes up the slope – don’t follow the river. After 1½
hours you’ll reach Lambromani, where a local may ask you to pay B$3 per
person to pass. You can camp here in the schoolyard.
An hour past Lambromani you’ll reach Wainapata, where the vegetation
grows thicker and more lush. Here, the route splits (to rejoin at Pampa
Quillapituni); the upper route is very steep and dangerous, so the lower one
is preferable. A short distance along, the lower route passes through an
interesting tunnel drilled through the rock. There’s a popular myth that it
dates from Inca times, but it was actually made with dynamite and likely
blasted out early in the 20th century by the Aramayo mining company to
improve the access to the Tipuani goldfields. At Pampa Quillapituni, 30
minutes beyond, is a favorable campsite. Just east of this, a trail branches off
to the right toward Calzada Pass, several days away on the Illampu circuit.
Four hours after crossing the swinging bridge at the Río Coocó, you’ll
reach the little settlement of Mina Yuna, where you can pick up basic
supplies, and it’s possible to camp on the soccer field.
An hour further down is Chusi, which is four hours before your first
encounter with the road. There’s no place to camp here, but you can stay in
the school. Puente Nairapi, over the Río Grande de Yavia, is a good place
for a swim to take the edge off the increasing heat.
Once you reach the road, the scene grows increasingly depressing. For a
final look at relatively unaffected landscape, follow the shortcut trail, which
begins with a steep Inca staircase and winds up at Baja Llipi and the
Puente de Tora toll bridge (B$2) over the Río Santa Ana.
After crossing the bridge, climb up the hill and hope for a camioneta or
4WD to take you to Tipuani and Guanay. Camionetas from the Río Santa
Ana bridge to Unutuluni cost B$5 per person; to continue on to Tipuani or
Guanay costs an additional B$15.
You can pick up basic supplies at Ancoma, Wainapata, Mina Yuna, Chusi
and Llipi, as well as at all the lower settlements along the road. Spartan
accommodations may be found in Unutuluni, Chima (rough-and-ready and
not recommended), Tipuani and Guanay, all of which are along the road.
Mapiri Trail
A longer, more adventurous alternative to El Camino del Oro trek is the sixto seven- day precolonial Mapiri trail, which was upgraded 100 years ago by
the Richter family in Sorata to connect their headquarters with the cinchona
(quinine) plantations of the upper Amazon Basin. The trek is now considered
dangerous, and you should check to see if conditions have changed before
heading out.
It’s a tough, demanding trek which requires a lot of physical exertion
beyond mere walking – expect to clamber over and under logs, hack at
vegetation with a machete, get assaulted by insects and destroy formerly
decent clothing! That said, it’s an amazing experience; the nature is
unspoiled, and for the large part you are out on your own miles from any
roads or villages.
An excellent side-trip before you get started will take you from Ingenio up
to the lovely medieval, cloud-wrapped village of Yani, where there’s a basic
alojamiento. Bolivia doesn’t get much more enigmatic than this and
adventurers won’t regret a visit.
No maps are available for this route, due to government sensitivity on
mining issues, and landslides often cause changes to the paths, which in
some parts are heavily overgrown – a machete will be necessary. Therefore,
it is strongly recommended to take a guide from Sorata. Guides for this trek
charge around B$350 to B$400 per day, and porters are about B$500 each.
You’ll thank yourself for every kilo you’re not carrying if you opt for the
porter.
Access
The Mapiri trail begins at the village of Ingenio, which has basic
alojamientos. It can be reached either by 4WD from Sorata (around B$500
for five people, three to four hours) or on foot over Abra Chuchu (4658m).
For the latter, start at the cemetery in Sorata and follow the track up past the
tiny settlements of Manzanani and Huaca Milluni to the larger village of
Chillkani, about three hours beyond Sorata. From there you have five hours
of fairly relentless climbing through semiforested slopes to Abra Chuchu.
You’ll meet up with the road twisting 4km below the pass.
Shortly after the crest, take the left turn down toward a small lake – the
route straight on leads to Ancoma and El Camino del Oro trek. This route
will take you over Paso Lechasani (4750m) and down past Mina Suerte to
Ingenio and the start of the Mapiri trail at 3550m.
The Route
Past Ingenio you’ll cross the Río Yani. Here the trail starts downstream, but
half an hour later it cuts uphill along a side stream; there’s a good campsite
where the trail crosses the stream. The path then twists uphill for 1½ hours
over a 4000m pass. In the next two hours you’ll cross three more ridges, then
descend past Cueva Cóndor, a cave that is also a good campsite, to a small
lake. From the lake the route ascends to Paso Apacheta Nacional (3940m),
then twists down El Tornillo, a corkscrew-like track that drops 150m. In
under an hour you’ll cross the Río Mamarani, where a good campsite is
protected by large rocks.
The next campsite lies three hours further along, beside a stream crossing
at the foot of the next big ascent. There is another campsite 30 minutes after
this one, near the next stream (collect water here). Here the trail climbs a
long staircase, then descends into a valley before climbing to the next pass,
Abra Nasacara (4000m). At this stage you’re on the ridge that dominates
most of the Mapiri trail route, with great views of the Illampu massif. For the
next three days, you’ll follow this ridge up and down, slowly losing altitude
and passing through mostly lush jungle vegetation; fill your water bottles at
every opportunity. The first water along this stretch is at Tolapampa, which
also makes a good campsite.
The trail then passes through thick forest and you may need to do a bit of
bush bashing with a machete; plan on getting good and wet from mud and
the soaked vegetation. Six hours beyond Abra Nasacara is a very pleasant
ridge-top campsite, Koka Punku, with water in a shallow pond 50m away.
About three hours further on, just before a prominent landslide, look out for
the water 3m off the track to the right. Four hours and three crests later is the
last permanent water source and campsite at Lagunillas. An hour later you’ll
find good (but dry) campsites on the hill, Alto Palmar.
From Alto Palmar, the trail tunnels through dense vegetation along the
Cuesta de Amargura (Bitterness Ridge). After three hours the jungle gives
way to merely thick bush. Six hours later you’ll reach Pararaní (1900m),
where there’s water (which needs to be purified) in a small pond near the
ruins of an old house. An hour later there’s a semi-permanent lake, and just
beyond it the trail leaves the dense vegetation and issues onto a grassy ridge
flanked by thick forest. It’s then 4½ hours to Incapampa, with a semipermanent marsh and a campsite. Along this stretch, wildlife is rife – mainly
in the form of bees, ants, ticks, flies and mosquitoes, as well as plenty of
butterflies.
About three hours beyond Incapampa you’ll reach the hamlet of San José
(1400m), where there’s a campsite and a view over the village of Santiago.
Water can sometimes be found 300m down to the right of the route. After an
open area that’s actually an old cemetery, the left fork provides the faster
track to Mapiri.
Four to five hours of walking from San José brings you to Mapiri, which
is visible 1½ hours before you arrive. Here you’ll find several decent
alojamientos and motorized canoes that race the 80km downstream to
Guanay (B$25, three hours), which will seem like a city after a week of
isolation. Boats leave around 9am, but get there an hour earlier to get a
place. Alternatively, catch a camioneta along the 4WD track first to Santa
Rosa (don’t attempt to walk as there are two large river crossings), which
has a decent hostal with a swimming pool, and then 175km uphill back to
Sorata (B$45, 12 hours).
Guanay
POP 11,528 / ELEV 500M (1640FT)
Isolated Guanay makes a good base for visits to the gold-mining operations
along the Ríos Mapiri and Tipuani. Chatting with the down-to-earth miners
and barranquilleros (panners) can make for a particularly interesting
experience. This area and other spots upriver are frontier territory that are
reminiscent of the USA’s legendary Old West, and a bit of caution is advised.
A block downhill from the plaza, Hotel Pahuichi (r per person B$30) is
fairly primitive but probably offers the best value in town. It also boasts
Guanay’s best and most popular restaurant.
A good alternative to Hotel Pahuichi (and right next door) is Hotel
Minero (r per person B$30).
Getting There & Away
For detailed information on walking routes from Sorata, see El Camino del
Oro and Mapiri trek descriptions.
Boat
Access to the mining areas is by 4WD along the Llipi road, or by motorized
dugout canoes up the Río Mapiri. Boats to Mapiri leave daily at 9am (B$30,
four hours) from Puerto Mapiri when the river is high enough. The
exhilarating three-hour downstream run back to Guanay costs B$25. Charter
boats take travelers to Rurre, but these are pricey (B$2500 for a 10- to 15-
person boat, 10 hours). Stock up on equipment and food. Some agencies in
La Paz offer this trip.
Bus
The bus offices are all around the plaza, but buses actually depart from a
block away toward the river. Four companies offer daily runs to and from La
Paz via Caranavi and Yolosita (B$5, 10 hours). Departures in La Paz are
from along Av Las Americas daily at 9am, 10:30am and 1:30pm (noon on
Sunday). For Coroico, get off at Yolosita and catch a lift up the hill.
Aucapata & Iskanwaya
 2 / POP 4,146 / ELEV 2850M (9350FT)
The tiny, remote village of Aucapata is about as far off the beaten track as
most people will get. Perched on a ledge, on the shoulder of a dramatic peak,
it’s a great place to hole up for a couple of days’ reading, hiking and
relaxing. While most of Aucapata’s very few visitors want to see Iskanwaya
– somewhat optimistically dubbed ‘Bolivia’s Machu Picchu’ – they may
well take one look at the 1500m descent to the ruins (and the corresponding
climb back up) and seek out the small Iskanwaya museum in the village
itself, which contains artifacts from the site. Admission is free but donations
are expected.
The major but near-forgotten ruins of Iskanwaya, on the western slopes of
the Cordillera Real, sit in a cactus-filled canyon, perched 250m above the
Río Llica. Thought to date from between 1145 and 1425, the site is attributed
to the Mollu culture.
While Iskanwaya isn’t exactly another Machu Picchu, the 13-hectare site
is outwardly more impressive than Tiwanaku. This large citadel was built on
two platforms and flanked by agricultural terraces and networks of irrigation
HOTEL
canals. It contains more than 70 buildings, plus delicate walls, narrow
streets, small plazas, storerooms, burial sites and niches.
For more information ask around Acuapata for Señor Jorge Albarracín,
who is passionate about the area and the Iskanwaya ruins, or Marcelo
Calamani, who can guide you to the ruins and speaks a little English. You
can get in touch with them on the village telephone ( 213-5519). For
background reading, Iskanwaya: La Ciudadela que Sólo Vivía de Noche, by
Hugo Boero Roja (1992), contains photos, maps and diagrams of the site,
plus information on nearby villages.
Sleeping & Eating
There’s a small alojamiento (r per person B$15) behind the church. For
meals there’s only a small eatery on the corner of the plaza where you’ll get
whatever happens to be available. Be sure to bring small change or you’re
likely to clean out the town.
Hotel Iskanwaya $
( 2-213-5519; r per person B$35) Aucapata’s smart-looking hotel has
clean rooms and hot showers.
Getting There & Away
Aucapata lies about 20km northeast of Quiabaya and 50km northwest of
Sorata, but is most easily reached from La Paz. A Trans Provincia del
Norte ( 238-2239) bus departs at 5am from Reyes Cardona in the
cemetery district of La Paz every Tuesday and Friday (B$35, 10 hours). You
might have better luck getting transportation from more accessible
Charazani, or getting off a Charazani–bound bus at the cruce (turnoff) for
Aucapata, but don’t bank on it.
There’s also rather difficult access from Sorata, which involves a four-day
hike via Paya- yunga. Guides are available in Sorata. One other access route,
which is quite challenging but very interesting, is a little-known trek from
the village of Amarete, in the Cordillera Apolobamba. A guide is essential;
you may be able to hire one by asking around Amarete, Curva or Charazani.
Note that there’s no accurate map of the area, and in the rainy season hiking
is dangerous on the exposed routes in the region and not recommended.
Caranavi
 2 / POP 51,000 / ELEV 976M (3202FT)
All buses between La Paz and the lowlands pass through uninspiring
Caranavi, a bare-brick town midway between Coroico and Guanay that
could do with a lick of paint. Travelers love to knock this place, but it
doesn’t deserve their scorn. If you’re passing time here, take a look at the
Untucala suspension bridge, which spans a crossing used since Inca times.
Caranavi has several inexpensive hotels, all near the highway. Hotel
Landivar ( 823-2052; Calama 15; r per person B$50; ) is one of the
better ones and has a pleasant pool. More sophisticated is the recommended
Hostal Caturra Inn ( 823-2209; s/d US$120/180; ) , which has hot
showers, fans, lovely gardens, a good restaurant and a clean pool – a really
unexpected treat if you’ve just climbed out of a dusty bus.
The road between here and Coroico is only open at night.
CORDILLERA REAL
Bolivia’s Royal Range has more than 600 peaks over 5000m, most of which
are relatively accessible and many of which are just a few hours’ drive from
the nation’s capital. They’re also still free of the growing bureaucracy
attached to climbing and trekking in the Himalayas. The following section
is a rundown of the more popular climbs in the Cordillera Real – there are
also fun treks, bikes and hikes here for non-climbers – but it is by no means
an exhaustive list. There are many other peaks to entice the experienced
climber, and whether you choose one of those described here or one of the
lesser known, climbing in the Bolivian Andes is always an adventure.
The best season for climbing in the Cordillera Real is May to September.
Note that most of the climbs described here are technical and require
climbing experience, a reputable climbing guide and proper technical
equipment. You should be fully acclimatized to the altitude before
attempting any of these ascents.
CLIMBING RESOURCES
Call the new rescue group Socorro Andino Bolivia ( 7197-1147, 7158-1118;
www.socorroandino.org) if you get in a jam. It does technical mountain rescues and charges
around US$100 per day, per person on the rescue.
The Andes: A Guide for Climbers (2005, John Biggar) Has basic descriptions and decent
maps from the area.
Bolivia: Guía de Trekking y Ascenciones (2012, David Taurá) A new Spanish-language guide
to Bolivia’s hikes and climbs.
Andes Handbook (www.andeshandbook.com) A good website to consult, it offers route
information on several of the peaks in the Cordillera Real in Spanish.
Bolivia: A Climbing Guide (1999, Yossi Brain) Now out of print, but available online, this has
lots of info on climbs in the Cordillera Real.
Nuestras Montañas A Spanish-language resource written by local mountaineering guides,
available at InfoTur ( Click here ) in La Paz.
Guides & Equipment
By far the easiest way of tackling these mountains is to go on a guided
climb. Several La Paz agencies offer trips that include transportation,
refugio (mountain hut) accommodations, equipment hire and a guide. Some
of the same agencies will rent you equipment on its own if you want to
tackle the peaks without taking the tour but this option should only be
considered by those with extensive mountaineering experience at similar
altitudes. Prices start at around B$900 for an ascent of Huayna Potosí, but
are significantly higher for the more technical climbs – around B$3000-plus
for Illimani, for example. Several agencies and foreign climbing-tour agents
offer packages that combine ascents of several of the Cordillera Real peaks.
Choose your tour agent carefully; cheaper does not mean better.
You can also contract a guide independently. The Asociación de Guías
de Montaña (www.agmtb.org) is an association of registered mountain
guides. If you are in a group, it’s worth paying extra to make sure that there
are two guides accompanying you, so that if one member of the group
succumbs to altitude sickness the ascent isn’t compromised.
Huayna Potosí
This is Bolivia’s most popular major peak because of its imposing beauty
and ease of access, as well as the fact that it’s 88m over the magic 6000m
figure (but 26ft under the magic 20,000ft figure). While most people come
here to climb, you can also stay at the mountain lodge, and head out for
some fun hikes or mountain bikes.
There are a number of routes to the top; the one described here is the
North Peak route, the most popular with visitors and tour companies. It’s
appealing because it can be climbed by beginners with a competent guide
and technical equipment. Beginners yes, but fit beginners; it’s quite steep
toward the end and it’s a tough climb. Though some people attempt to
climb Huayna Potosí in one day, it is not recommended. You’re better off
attempting the climb in two or three days (three days is best for newbies to
ensure you properly acclimatize and learn the ropes before you hit higher
sections). Guided trips cost between B$900 and B$1100.
There are five refugios in the Paso Zongo area; the better-equipped is
Huayna Potosí Refugio ( in La Paz 2-245-6717; www.huaynapotosi.com; dm incl breakfast B$175, dinner B$50). Run by a La Paz tour
company, it’s a comfortable, heated spot and a fine place to acclimatize –
there’s pretty walking to be done hereabouts and plenty of advice and good
cheer. Reserve ahead. Refugio San Calixto (Casa Blanca; dm B$40) is
right by the La Paz–Zongo road (buses will let you off outside) and is a
simpler but very hospitable spot. You can also camp here. Transportation to
the refugios, guides, rations and porters can be arranged through most La
Paz tour agencies.
Mountain Biking
La Paz mountain-bike outfits take advanced riders here for the descent from
the base of spectacular mountain, past Zongo Dam, and then along a
dramatic 40km, 3600m descent into the lush and humid Yungas. This is a
dead-end road that lacks a great destination at its finish, but there’s little
vehicular traffic, so you tend to have the road to yourself and can open up
the throttle a little more.
Access
A 4WD from La Paz to the trailhead at Paso Zongo costs around B$500 one
way for up to five people. A taxi should be a bit less with haggling (aim for
B$250 one way and make sure your driver knows the way). Daily Trans
Zongo buses leave at 6am from Plaza Ballivián in El Alto (B$13, two
hours).
As Huayna Potosí is so popular, lots of climbers are headed out that way
during the climbing season. If you only want a lift, check with specialist
climbing agencies. Someone will probably have a 4WD going on the day
you want, and you can share costs for the trip.
The Route
From the Huayna Potosí Refugio, cross the dam and follow the aqueduct
until you reach the third path on your left signed ‘Glacier Huayna Potosí.’
Take this path to a glacial stream then through and across the rocks to reach
the ridge of a moraine. Near the end of the moraine – where you’ll pay
B$10 to climb the mountain at a small rock hut – descend slightly to your
right and then ascend the steep scree gullies. At the top, bear left and follow
the cairns to reach the Campo Rocas Glacier (5200m). There’s a hut to
sleep in, and dry places to camp. Most tours stop here for the night, before
commencing the ascent at around 2am.
The glacier is crevassed, especially after July, so rope up while crossing
it. Ascend the initial slopes then follow a long, gradually ascending traverse
to the right, before turning left and climbing steeply to a flat area between
5500m and 5700m known as Campo Argentino (a seldom-used alternate
sleeping spot). It will take you about two to three hours to reach this point.
Camp on the right of the path, but note that the area further to the right is
heavily crevassed, especially later in the season.
The following morning you should leave from here between 4am and
6am. Follow the path/trench out of Campo Argentino, and head uphill to
your right until you join a ridge. Turn left here and cross a flat stretch to
reach the steep and exposed Polish Ridge (named in honor of the Pole who
fell off it and died while soloing in 1994). Here you cross a series of rolling
glacial hills and crevasses to arrive below the summit face. Either climb
straight up the face to the summit or cross along the base of it to join the
ridge that rises to the left. This ridge provides thrilling views down the
1000m-high west face. Either route will bring you to the summit in five to
seven hours from Campo Argentino.
The descent to Campo Argentino from the summit takes a couple of
hours; from there, it’s another one or two hours back to the refugio at Paso
Zongo.
Illimani
Illimani, the 6438m giant overlooking La Paz, was first climbed in 1898 by
a party led by WM Conway, a pioneer 19th-century alpinist. Although it’s
not a difficult climb technically, the combination of altitude and ice
conditions warrants serious consideration and caution. Technical equipment
is essential above the snow line; caution is especially needed on the
exposed section immediately above Nido de Cóndores where several
climbers have perished.
Access
The easiest way to reach the first Illimani camp, Puente Roto, is via
Pinaya, a three-hour trip by 4WD from La Paz (about B$850). From there,
it’s two to three hours’ walk to Puente Roto. At Pinaya you can hire porters
(B$120) and mules (B$120) to carry your gear to Puente Roto or to the high
camp at Nido de Cóndores. This is a wise investment.
For those on the cheap, a daily 5am bus (B$10) goes from near La Paz’
Mercado Rodríguez to the village of Quilihuaya, from where you’ll have a
three-hour slog to Pinaya – complete with a 400m elevation gain. Buses
return from Quilihuaya to La Paz several days a week at around 8:30am,
but if you’re relying on public transportation you should carry extra food
just in case.
An alternative route to the base camp is via Cohoni. Buses and camiones
leave La Paz for Cohoni (B$30, five hours) in the early afternoon Monday
to Saturday from the corner of General Luis Lara and Calle Boquerón. They
leave Cohoni to return to La Paz around 8:30am and may take anywhere
from five hours to all day depending on which route is followed.
The Route
The normal route to Pico Sur, the highest of Illimani’s five summits, is
straightforward but heavily crevassed. If you don’t have technical glacier
experience, hire a competent professional guide.
The route to Nido de Cóndores (5400m), a rock platform beside the
glacier, is a four- to six-hour slog up a rock ridge from Puente Roto. There’s
no water at Nido de Cóndores, so you’ll have to melt snow – bring
sufficient stove fuel.
From Nido de Cóndores you need to set off at about 2am. Follow the
path in the snow leading uphill from the camp; the path grows narrower and
steeper, then flattens out a bit before becoming steeper again. It then crosses
a series of crevasses before ascending to the right to reach a level section.
From here, aim for the large break in the skyline to the left of the summit,
taking care to avoid the two major crevasses, and cross one steep section
that is iced over from July onwards. After you pass through the skyline
break, turn right and continue up onto the summit ridge. The final three
vertical meters involve walking 400m along the ridge at over 6400m
elevation.
Plan on six to 10 hours for the climb from Nido de Cóndores to the
summit and three to four hours to descend back to camp.
If possible continue down from Nido de Cóndores to Puente Roto on the
same day. The 1000m descent is not appealing after a long day, but your
body will thank you the following day and will recover more quickly at the
lower altitude. You’ll also avoid having to melt snow for a second night.
On the fourth day you can walk from Puente Roto back out to Pinaya in
about two hours.
Condoriri Massif
The massif known as Condoriri is actually a cluster of 13 peaks ranging in
height from 5100m to 5648m. The highest of these is Cabeza del Cóndor
(Head of the Condor), which has twin winglike ridges flowing from either
side of the summit. Known as Las Alas (The Wings), these ridges cause the
peak to resemble a condor lifting its wings on takeoff. According to local
legend, the massif is the last refuge of the biggest and most ferocious
condors in the Andes, which kidnap children and educate them to become
‘man-condors’ and then return them to the human population to bring terror
and death.
Cabeza del Cóndor is a challenging climb following an exposed ridge,
and should be attempted only by experienced climbers. However, a number
of other peaks in the Condoriri Massif, including the beautiful Pequeño
Alpamayo (5370m), can be attempted by beginners with a competent guide.
The hike to the glacier is fun for non-climbers.
Access
There is no public transportation from La Paz to Condoriri. A 4WD to the
start of the walk-in at the dam at Laguna Tuni costs around B$550. If you
don’t want to use a 4WD transfer, you can trek the 24km from Milluni to
the Laguna Tuni dam on the road to Paso Zongo. Take everything you will
need with you as there is nowhere to buy provisions once you begin the
trek.
It isn’t possible to drive beyond the dam because there’s a locked gate
across the road. Some drivers know a way around it, but if you need to hire
pack animals you’ll have to do so before you reach the dam. Locals charge
B$70 per day for mules, and a bit less for llamas, which can carry less. You
also might have to sign into the Parque Nacional Condoriri.
From Laguna Tuni, a rough road circles south around the lake and
continues up a drainage trending north. Once you’re in this valley, you’ll
have a view of the Cabeza del Cóndor and Las Alas.
From the end of the road, follow the obvious paths up along the right side
of the valley until you reach a large lake, Chiar Khota. Follow the right
shore of the lake to arrive at the base camp, which is an easy three hours
from Laguna Tuni. There are toilet facilities here and the community will
charge you B$20 to stay the night.
The Route
Leave base camp at about 3am and follow the path up the east-trending
valley through boulders, passing some lakes on your left. Keep heading up
the main trail, on the right-hand side of the valley, until you reach the
glacier. You should reach this point in about 1½ hours from base camp.
Here you should rope up and put on crampons. Head left across the
glacier before rising to the col (lowest point of the ridge), taking care to
avoid the crevasses. Climb to the right up the rock-topped summit Tarija
(5240m), which affords impressive views of Pequeño Alpamayo, before
dropping down (100m) a scree and rock slope to rejoin a glacier on the
other side. From there, follow the main ridge to the summit. The ridge has
some exposure.
Ancohuma
Ancohuma is the highest peak in the Sorata Massif, towering on the remote
northern edge of the Cordillera Real. It was not climbed until 1919 and
remains a challenging climb.
For a long time, various sources put Ancohuma at around 7000m, which
would have made it higher than Argentina’s Aconcagua, but in 2002 an
American student lugged GPS equipment to the top and determined that its
true height is 6427m, a few meters short of Bolivia’s highest mountain,
Sajama. Most climb the peak in two days.
Access
The peak is accessed via Sorata from where it is possible to rent a 4WD for
the long traverse to Cocoyo or up to Laguna Chilate (4200m). More
convenient is hiring a 4WD all the way from La Paz to Cocoyo, but it is
also considerably more expensive. If you have a serious amount of gear,
you can rent a mule train to carry it from Sorata to base camp, which is in
the lake basin east of the peaks at about 4500m. Plan on at least two days
for these various transportation arrangements to get you to the lakes.
Ancohuma is most often climbed from the west, using Laguna Glacial as a
base camp. Further advice and information is available in Sorata.
The Route
If you have opted for the more easily accessed western route, hike from
Sorata to the base camp at Laguna Glacial. From here the route climbs the
obvious moraine and then ascends the glacier, over fields of extremely
dangerous crevasses. Most make a high camp at 5400m or 5800m. It then
climbs to the bergschrund (crevasse) and across a relatively level ice
plateau to the summit pyramid. This is most easily climbed via the north
ridge; the first part is quite steep and icy, but then gets easier toward the
summit.
THE KALLAWAYA
Originating in six villages around Curva in the Apolobamba region, the Kallawaya are a group
of healers who pass ancient traditions down the generations, usually from father to son. Around
a quarter of the inhabitants of these villages become involved in the healing tradition, although
there are many more people throughout the Andes that pass themselves off as authentic
Kallawaya when they are nothing of the kind.
The origins and age of the Kallawaya tradition are unknown, although some Kallawaya claim
to be descended from the vanished people of Tiwanaku. The Kallawaya language, Machaj Juyai,
used exclusively for healing, is derived from Quechua, the language of the Incas. With only 100
to 200 Kallawaya speakers left in the world, the language is at risk of extinction – globally
around half of the 7000 languages spoken on earth may disappear in the next 100 years. Check
out www.livingtongues.org to hear recordings of Kallawaya and learn more about language
preservation initiatives.
For the Kallawaya, language, knowledge and skills are passed down through generations,
although it’s sometimes possible for aspiring healers to study under acknowledged masters.
The early Kallawaya were known for their wanderings and traveled all over the continent in
search of medicinal herbs. The most capable of today’s practitioners will have memorized the
properties and uses of 600 to 1000 different healing herbs, but their practices also involve magic
and charms. They believe that sickness and disease are the result of a displaced or imbalanced
ajallu (life force). The incantations and amulets are intended to encourage it back into a state of
equilibrium within the body.
A hallmark of the Kallawaya is the alforja (medicine pouch), which is carried by the men.
While women don’t become healers, they still play an important part in the gathering of herbs.
In Lagunillas, there’s a small exhibition about the Kallawaya in the Museo Interpretativo
Center. The Kallawaya’s legacy has also been recorded by several anthropologists and medical
professionals; German university psychiatrist Ina Rössing has produced an immense fourvolume work called El Mundo de los Kallahuaya about her ongoing research, and Frenchman
Louis Girault has compiled an encyclopedia of herbal remedies employed by the Kallawaya,
entitled Kallahuaya, Curanderos Itinerantes de los Andes.
CORDILLERA APOLOBAMBA
The remote Cordillera Apolobamba, flush against the Peruvian border north
of Lake Titicaca, is becoming a popular hiking, trekking and climbing
destination. Mountaineers in particular will find a wonderland of tempting
peaks, first ascents and new routes to discover, and the trek from Lagunillas
to Agua Blanca – with magnificent Andean landscapes – was one of the
most memorable in the country. Recent reports from tour operators of
robberies and assaults indicate this area could be dangerous for trekking.
While access is improving, it must be emphasized that this is an isolated
region, and far from set up for tourism. There are few services,
transportation isn’t reliable and the people maintain a fragile traditional
lifestyle. Comparatively few locals – mostly men – speak more than
rudimentary Spanish. Sensitivity to the local sentiments of this highly
traditional Aymará- and Quechua-speaking area will help keep its distinctive
character intact.
Mining is on the rise in the region. Pollution from mining operations has
caused some conflicts with the largely agrarian communities here, and you
should check on the political situation before visiting.
Every town and village in the region holds an annual festival, most of
which fall between June and September. The Fiesta de La Virgen de las
Nieves, one of the best, takes place in Italaque, northeast of Escoma, around
August 5. It features a potpourri of traditional Andean dances.
Charazani
POP 9161 / ELEV 3250M (10,662FT)
HOT SPRINGS
VILLAGE
RUINS
Charazani is the administrative and commercial center and transportation
axis of Bautista Saavedra province, and by far the largest town in the area.
You can hike from here to the trailhead for the Lagunillas– Agua Blanca
trek. Services in Charazani have increased exponentially in recent years, and
several NGOs are working in the area on sustainable development projects,
including solar power, textile production and the promotion of responsible
tourism. It’s a relaxed spot to visit, and weary hikers will enjoy the hot
springs.
Two fiestas are held in Charazani; the biggest takes place around July 16
and the smaller one around August 6. There’s also a wonderful children’s
dance festival (around November 16) in honor of the Virgen del Carmen, an
invocation of the Virgin Mary.
Sights & Activities
Termas de Charazani Phutina
(admission B$5; 7am-9pm, closed Mon to 2pm for cleaning) Along the
river, about 10 minutes’ walk upstream from town, you’ll pass the Termas de
Charazani Phutina, a hot-springs complex where you can bathe and enjoy a
hot shower. Other natural thermal baths, complete with a steaming hot
waterfall, can be found a two-hour hike away. Head down the valley from
Charazani along the Apolo road alongside the Río Kamata. It’s a lovely spot.
Chari
The traditional Kallawaya village of Chari, 1½ hours’ walk from Charazani,
is a blend of terraces, flowers and vegetable gardens. A German
anthropologist started the Tuwans textile project, which is designed to
market the local hand-dyed weavings. The town is also home to a
Kallawaya cultural museum, a stone and thatch structure with exhibits
pertaining to medicinal plants and textile arts.
Pre-Incan Ruins
About an hour’s walk outside Chari are some pre-Incan ruins, reached by
walking through town and turning left at the enormous boulder that creates a
small cave. Follow this path to the cemetery, keep left until you gain the
HOTEL
HOTEL
HOTEL
ridge, then continue 200m up to the ruins. To avoid suspicion it’s best to
advise locals where you’re headed before setting off.
Sleeping & Eating
Several pensiones around the plaza offer soup, a main course and bad coffee
for under B$10.
Essentials can be purchased at tiendas (small, family-run shops)
surrounding the plaza. Trekkers, however, are advised to bring their supplies
from La Paz.
Accommodations are basic no matter where you look. These are relatively
comfortable options.
Residencial Charazani $
(r per person B$20) Just off the plaza on the Curva road, this nine-room
hotel is on your right. It’s fairly basic but offers a fabulous view over the
valley and, crucially, access to doña Sofia’s fine Bolivian cooking.
Hotel Akhamani $
(r per person B$20, apt B$40) A block below the plaza, Hotel Akhamani has
the highest standards and the widest variety of options, including a four-bed
mini-apartment with a private bathroom and small kitchen.
Residencial Inti Wasi $
(r per person B$25) Arranged around a traditional cobbled courtyard that
provides a pleasant atmosphere, this place can be found a block below the
plaza.
Information
There are telephones at the Transportes Altiplano ( 213-7439) office on
the plaza and in the alcaldía (Town Hall; 213-7282), a block below the
plaza. There is no ATM in town; ask at your hotel for local moneychangers.
If you happen to find it open, the public Nawiriywasi Library has books on
medicinal plants and the Kallawaya culture, and maps and information for
hikers, trekkers and climbers. Market day is Sunday.
Getting There & Away
From La Paz (B$25), Trans Provincia del Norte ( in La Paz 2-238-2239)
and the more reliable Trans Altiplano ( in La Paz 2-238-0859) depart
daily at 6am from Calle Reyes Cardona in the cemetery district. The services
take six to eight hours and return from Charazani daily at 6pm. Book tickets
in advance.
From Charazani, a 4WD route winds down to the Yungas village of Apolo
at the edge of the Amazon Basin, where you can stay overnight at the
monastery. The route is frequently negotiated by camiones during the dry
season, but several serious stream crossings and landslide risks mean it’s
best suited to mountain bikes or foot traffic in the wet.
Área Natural de Manejo Integrado
Nacional Apolobamba
In the late 1990s the Reserva Nacional de Fauna Ulla Ulla was renamed the
Área Natural de Manejo Integrado Nacional (Anmin) Apolobamba and was
expanded by nearly 300,000 hectares to 484,000 hectares. It now includes
the entire Cordillera Apolobamba and most of the renowned Lagunillas to
Agua Blanca trek along the range’s eastern slopes. At its northern end it
abuts Parque Nacional Madidi to form one of the western hemisphere’s most
extensive protected areas.
The original park – a loosely defined vicuña reserve along the Peruvian
border – was established in 1972, and was upgraded in 1997 in Unesco’s
‘Man and Biosphere Reserve Program.’ Later that same year the Instituto
Nacional de Fomento Lanero (Infol) was created to represent wool producers
and was charged with researching, monitoring and preventing habitat
degradation of the reserve’s camelids. Infol morphed into the Instituto
Boliviano de Tecnología Agropecuaria (IBTA), which focuses more on
agricultural development and social services.
The modern park is home to several thousand alpacas and vicuñas, and
also to Bolivia’s densest condor population. In addition to the popular hiking
routes, you’ll find excellent wild trekking around Lagos Cololo, Nube,
Quello, Kanahuma and Pullo Pullo, all of which enjoy snow-covered
backdrops and rich waterbird populations, including flamingos and several
species of Andean geese.
Sleeping & Eating
Noncampers can normally find accommodations in local homes for B$20 per
person – just ask around. The biggest tienda is in Ulla Ulla. At La Cabaña,
5km from Ulla Ulla village, IBTA has a small hostel where you may be able
to stay, but it’s suggested that you reserve via SERNAP in La Paz.
The best accommodations in the area are two associated albergues at
Lagunillas ( 213-37439; per person B$25) and Agua Blanca ( 872-
0140; per person B$25, with meals B$65). They offer dorm beds, hot
showers, kitchen facilities and a fireplace in a modern building. Reserve
ahead, or hunt around to find the keeper of the keys. There are ranger
stations at Antaquilla, Charazani, Curva, Kotapampa, Pelechuco, Pullo
Pullo, Suches and Hichacollo; the last three were designed by a La Paz
architect and blend adobe construction, domed thatched roofs and passive
solar walls to reflect both modern and traditional styles.
Hikers can camp at any of these sites or stay inside – sufficient space and
your Spanish skills permitting.
Information
A team of park rangers roams between several far-flung Casas de
Guardaparques, which are all linked via radio communication but
infrequently staffed during the day. For pre-departure information contact
Servicio Nacional de Áreas Protegidas (SERNAP) in La Paz. In an
emergency contact them by radio on frequency 8335 USB.
The village of Curva (3780m) has a few basic stores, and at nearby
Lagunillas is the Museo Interpretativo Center, which provides limited local
information and an exhibition on the Kallawaya traditions. As part of the
same project, Agua Blanca has a small museum and weaving workshop.
Curva’s main festival is a colorful affair that takes place on June 29.
Lagunillas to Agua Blanca (Curva
to Pelechuco) Trek
This fantastic four- to five-day hike (45km) passes through splendid and
largely uninhabited wilderness. Recent reports indicate that safety is a
concern here, as are pollution and the lack of support services along the way.
Check around before you head out.
The track stays mostly above 4000m and includes five high passes.
There’s arguably no better scenery in the Andes, and along the way you’re
sure to see llamas and alpacas, as well as more elusive Andean wildlife, such
as viscachas, vicuñas, condors and perhaps even a spectacled bear.
The trek may be done in either direction, as both ends have relatively
reliable – albeit limited – public transportation links with La Paz. Most
people do the route from south to north, but starting in Agua Blanca would
mean an additional day of downhill walking and could include a grand finale
at Charazani’s hot springs. The trail is pre-Columbian and built on a stone
platform; some areas still have cobbled paving up to 2m wide.
It is strongly recommended that you hire a guide and pack animals for the
trek – no reliable maps of the region exist. Clients must often carry their own
food and stove, and are also often expected to provide meals for their guides,
porters and muleteers. Bring enough food for a week, preferably from La
Paz, as Curva and Pelechuco have only basics at inflated prices.
Access
Trans Altiplano ( in La Paz 2-238-0859) runs daily buses to Lagunillas
from La Paz. They leave from Reyes Cardona in the cemetery district in the
early hours of the morning. Trans Norte ( in La Paz 2-238-2239) runs a
daily service to Agua Blanca and Pelechuco from El Alto (at the ex- tranca
Río Seco) at 6am (B$35, 12 hours). The bus may stop en route – depending
on the driver’s mood – at the market in Huancasaya on the Peruvian border,
before continuing to Ulla Ulla, Agua Blanca and Pelechuco. Buses return at
odd hours so check the schedules before leaving La Paz, as they change
often. At the time of writing, the return from Agua Blanca departed between
3am and 4am.
A more expensive but considerably easier and more comfortable way to
go is by 4WD. A vehicle and driver from La Paz to Lagunillas (B$2100,
seven hours) or Agua Blanca (B$2500, 10 hours) may be worthwhile
because it allows daylight travel through the incomparable scenery.
Alternatively, you can pay to leave the logistics to someone else and do the
trek with an agency.
The Route
Because most people do the trek from south to north – from Lagunillas (also
known as Tilinhuaya) to Agua Blanca – that’s how it’s described here. If you
want to start from Charazani, you can either follow the long and winding
road for four to five hours or take the 3½ to four-hour shortcut. Cross the
river at the thermal baths, then climb the other bank and head back to the
road. After about an hour you should follow a path that climbs to a whiteand-yellow church on your left. Beyond the church, descend the other side of
the hill, to just above the community of Niñocorín. After a short distance
you’ll strike an obvious path; turn left onto it and follow it as it contours
through the fields and then descends to cross a river, where it starts the steep
climb into Curva.
Most people choose to start in Lagunillas, with its pretty lake bristling
with waterbirds. The albergue here can arrange beasts of burden and guides.
From here, it’s a short walk to the village of Curva, center of the Kallawaya
community. From Curva, head toward the cross on the hill north of the
village and skirt around the right side of the hill. About an hour out of
Curva, you’ll go across a stream. Continue uphill along the right bank of the
stream. At a cultivated patch about 200m before the valley descending from
the right flank of the snowy peak, cross the stream to join a well-defined
path entering from your left. If you continue along this path, you’ll reach an
excellent flat, streamside campsite. Alternatively, keep following this trail
for another 1½ hours to an ideal campsite at Jatunpampa (4200m).
From Jatunpampa, head up the valley and across a small plain to the col
(saddle between two peaks) with a cairn, about two hours along. Known as
the Cumbre Tambillo, this 4700m pass offers fabulous views of Akamani
off to the northwest. One to two hours further along you’ll arrive at a good
campsite (4100m) near the Incacancha (aka Incachani) waterfall.
The following morning’s zig-zag ascent of the Akamani Sacred Hill
looks a bit daunting, but it isn’t that bad. Cross the bridge below the
waterfall and follow the switchbacks up the scree gully. As you ascend,
enjoy distant views of Ancohuma and Illampu. After two hours or so you’ll
reach Mil Curvas (4800m), another high pass.
From the pass, traverse gently uphill to the left until you gain the ridge,
which affords great views of the Cordillera Real to the south and Cuchillo II
to the north. At this point the obvious trail descends past a small lake before
arriving at a larger lake with a good view of Akamani.
Climb up to the next ridge before descending an hour to the small mining
settlement of Viscachani, where you’ll strike the 4WD track toward Hilo
Hilo (aka Illo Illo). In another hour this road ascends to the Cumbre
Viscachani pass (4900m), which also provides superb views of the
Cordillera Real to the south and the Sunchulli Valley to the north and west.
At the pass the road drops into the valley; at the point where it bears right,
look for a path turning off to the left. This will take you to a point above the
Sunchulli gold mine. From Sunchulli, follow a contour line above the
aqueduct for about an hour, until you see an idyllic campsite (4600m) below
Cuchillo I.
The fourth day of the hike is probably the finest, as it includes sections
that have been used for centuries by miners and campesinos. From the
campsite, the road ascends for about two hours via a series of switchbacks to
the Cumbre Sunchulli (5100m) pass. From the pass, you can scramble up to
a cairn above the road for excellent views dominated by Colocolo (5916m),
the southern Cordillera Apolobamba’s highest peak.
Descend along the road for a few minutes, then jog right down a steep but
obvious path that crosses a stream opposite the glacier lake below Cuchillo
II before descending to the valley floor. If you follow the valley floor, you’ll
rejoin the road a couple of minutes above the picturesque stone-and-thatch
village of Piedra Grande, three hours from the pass. Camping is possible
here.
Follow the road for about an hour, then join the precolonial road turning
off downhill to your right. After you cross a bridge, you should follow the
obvious path to the right, leading you up into the village of Hilo Hilo in
about an hour. Here you’ll find small stores selling the basics and it may
even be possible to rent a room for the night.
When leaving Hilo Hilo don’t be tempted onto the path to the left, which
leads west to Ulla Ulla (although this is also a viable trek). The correct route
is to the right, leaving the village above the school between the public
facilities and the cemetery. From there, cross the llama pastures until the
path becomes clear again. After crossing a bridge (about an hour out of
town) and beginning up the Palca Valley with a sharp rock peak at its head
(if it’s too overcast to see the rock, look for several small houses on your left
and turn there), you’ll stumble onto an ideal campsite set in a bend in the
valley, where there are a number of large fallen rocks.
From the campsite, head up the valley for about 1½ hours until you reach
a bridge over the stream. At this point the route begins to ascend to the
Cumbre Kiayansani pass (4900m), which you should reach in another 1½
hours. From the pass, descend past a lake, crossing pastures full of llamas,
and follow some pre-Columbian paving as well as stone steps cut into the
rock that date from the same period. In less than two hours you’ll arrive in
Pelechuco, a quaint colonial village founded by Jesuits in 1560.
There are a couple of simple alojamientos in Pelechuco, but a 30-minute
walk further, passing two intriguing pre-Columbian settlements, takes you to
the mining village of Agua Blanca, where there’s an albergue, for a welldeserved rest.
CORDILLERA QUIMSA CRUZ
The Cordillera Quimsa Cruz, although close to La Paz, is a largely
undiscovered wilderness of 5000m-plus peaks, some of which have only
been climbed for the first time in the last few years. Basque climbing
magazine Pyrenaica once labeled it a ‘South American Karakoram.’ In
1999, near the summit of Santa Veracruz, the Spaniard Javier Sánchez
discovered the remains of an 800-year-old ceremonial burial site with
ancient artifacts and weavings.
The Quimsa Cruz is not a large range – it’s only some 50km from end to
end – and the peaks are lower than in other Bolivian ranges. The highest
peak, Jacha Cuno Collo, rises to 5800m, and the other glaciated peaks range
from 4500m to 5300m. Granite peaks, glaciers and lakeside camping make
the Quimsa Cruz an unforgettable, untouristed Andean experience. It lies to
the southeast of Illimani, separated from the Cordillera Real by the Río La
Paz, and geologically speaking it’s actually a southern outlier of that range.
The Quimsa Cruz lies at the northern end of Bolivia’s tin belt, and tin
reserves have been exploited here since the late 1800s. While Bolivia’s tin
industry has gone through numerous boom-and-bust cycles, with
international prices up miners are returning to the region, and many of the
major mines that were closed during the price drops of the 1980s are now
open for business.
Activities
The Quimsa Cruz offers some of the finest adventure climbing in all of
Bolivia, and in every valley mining roads provide access to the
impressively glaciated peaks. Although all of the nevados of the Quimsa
Cruz have now been climbed, there are still plenty of unclimbed routes, and
expeditions are likely to have the mountains to themselves. If you have no
previous climbing experience you should take a guide from a La Paz
agency who really knows the area.
Trekking is also possible throughout the range, which is covered by IGM
mapping. The main route is the two- to three-day Mina Viloco to Mina
Caracoles trek, which crosses the range from west to east. Of interest
along this route is the renowned site of a 1971 airplane crash, which had
already been stripped by local miners before rescue teams arrived at the
scene two days later. Mina Viloco is 70km southeast of La Paz, and is
centered on a major tin mine. Mina Caracoles is still worked by
cooperatives, and is 13km northwest of Quime.
Staples are available in both Mina Viloco and Quime, but it’s still best to
carry everything you’ll need (food, fuel and other supplies) from La Paz.
Getting There & Away
Road access is relatively easy because of the number of mines in the area,
and it’s possible to drive to within 30 minutes’ walk of some glaciers.
Others, however, are up to a four-hour hike from the nearest road. The
easiest access is provided by Flota Trans-Inquisivi ( in La Paz 2-228-
4050), which leaves daily in the early morning from La Paz’ main bus
terminal for the eastern side of the range (to Quime, Inquisivi, Cajuata,
Circuato, Suri, Mina Caracoles, and, less often, Yacopampa and Frutillani).
Trans Araca ( in La Paz 2-228-4050) serves the communities and mines
on the western side of the range from its office on Av Francisco Carvajal, in
Barrio Villa Dolores, El Alto. To Mina Viloco, Araca or Cairoma, a bus
departs daily at 7am taking seven to 10 hours.
Those with a bit more ready cash can rent a 4WD and driver for the fiveto seven-hour journey from La Paz (expect to pay at least B$2000); any of
the services used by mountaineers and trekkers can organize the trip.
Top of section
     Includes »
     Oruro
     Parque Nacional Sajama
     Uyuni & the Southwest Circuit
     Uyuni
     Salar de Uyuni
     Los Lípez
     Tupiza
Southern Altiplano
Why Go?
The harsh and at times almost primeval geography of the southern Altiplano
will tug at the heartstrings of visitors with a deep love of bleak and solitary
places. Stretching southward from La Paz, this high-plains wilderness is
framed by majestic volcanic peaks, swathes of treeless wilderness and the
white emptiness of the eerie salares (salt deserts), which are almost devoid
of life. At night the stargazing is spectacular, and it’s as cold as you could
ever imagine.
The area around Parque Nacional Sajama offers an amazing wilderness to
explore, while revelers may wish to hit up Carnaval celebrations in the
gritty, straight-talking mining city of Oruro. Further south the Salar de
Uyuni is the star attraction, and a three-day jeep tour of the region is at the
top of most travelers’ itineraries. From here, you can head to the warmer
cactus-studded valleys around Tupiza for horseback riding and mountain
biking.
When to Go
Aug-Oct The best time for salt-flat and wilderness trips.
Oct-Nov Good deals on salar tours and the chance to see the salt flat
flooded.
Jan-Mar Amazing Carnaval costumes and a huge water-balloon fight.
Best Places to Eat
»Minuteman Revolutionary Pizza ( Click here )
»Mercado Campero ( Click here )
»Milan Center ( Click here )
Best Places to Stay
»Hotel Tayka de Sal ( Click here )
»Hostal Kory Wara ( Click here )
»Hotel Mitru ( Click here )

Southern Altiplano Highlights
 Gorge your senses on the almost extraterrestrial landscapes of
the Los Lípez ( Click here ) region in the country’s far southwest
 Explore Parque Nacional Sajama ( Click here ) with its
towering snow-topped volcano, Bolivia’s loftiest peak
 Strap on some sunglasses and wonder at the salty expanse of
the Salar de Uyuni ( Click here )
 Marvel at the stunning costumes of Oruro’s boisterous
Carnaval ( Click here )
 Whistle the theme from your favorite Western as you guide
your horse up the narrow gullies around Tupiza ( Click here )
 Travel in nomad style on a do-it-yourself adventure around
Lago Poopó ( Click here ) near Salar de Uyuni
 Sample llama jerky and learn about llama-herding traditions
from Aymará pastoralists in Curahuara de Carangas ( Click here )
 Cross the border to the Chilean desert oasis of San Pedro de
Atacama ( Click here )
History
The prehistoric lakes Minchín and Tauca once covered most of this
highland plateau. They evaporated around 10,000 years ago, leaving behind
a parched landscape of brackish puddles and salt deserts. Pre-Columbian
civilizations didn’t leave much of a mark on the region; some time in the
mid-15th century an Inca ruler sent his son Tupac-Yupanqui southward to
conquer all the lands he encountered. Tupac-Yupanqui and his gang
marched on across the wastelands to the northern bank of Chile’s Río
Maule, where a fierce band of Araucanian people inspired them to stake out
the southern boundary of the Inca empire and turn back toward Cuzco.
These days, outside the major towns and cities, most people cluster
around mining camps. During the late 1980s a mining crisis devastated the
industry, sending miners fleeing to lower elevations. But with commodity
prices up and the world’s largest stash of lithium just waiting to be
extracted, mining is back and, with it, controversy. In fact, much of
Bolivia’s social conflict now centers around contamination from mines, and
the nationalization and management of the industry. Climate change and
desertification is affecting the region’s natural and social landscape in a
major way as well, making it easier to sow lucrative quinoa crops at higher
elevations and triggering a ten-fold spike in land prices.
National Parks
Parque Nacional Sajama, Bolivia’s first national park, is a region of
magnificent peaks, plains and wildlife habitat. It is also home to the world’s
highest forest and some of South America’s loftiest hot springs. Even if
you’re not into hardcore mountaineering, an evening dip in the clear springs
at the base of Volcán Sajama in the company of a few camelids is worth the
trek. The Reserva Nacional de Fauna Andina Eduardo Avaroa is a highlight
of Southwest Circuit tours and the gateway to Chile for those headed to San
Pedro de Atacama.
 Getting There & Away
From La Paz, the southern Altiplano is easily accessed by bus, although off
the paved main roads the ride can be long and bumpy. The route from the
central highland cities of Potosí and Sucre is fairly easy, with new paved
roads taking you to both Tupiza and Oruro. The overland route from Chile
is a scenic mountain traverse on a good road from Arica, and Villazón has
an easy border crossing with Argentina.
The train between Oruro and Villazón, which stops in Uyuni and Tupiza,
provides a fine overland alternative to grueling bus travel.
ORURO
 2 / POP 201,000 / ELEV 3706M (12,158FT)
Oruro is dirty, crowded, the food sucks and there’s not much to do outside of
Carnaval season. Yet, there’s something about this place – the largest berg in
the region, a miners’ city that takes no slack from anyone – that endears it to
visitors, making for an oddly atavistic experience that some may find
intoxicating.
In many ways Oruro (which means ‘where the sun is born’) is the most
‘Bolivian’ of Bolivia’s nine provincial capitals and an intriguing place where
90% of the inhabitants are of indigenous heritage. Orureños (Oruro locals)
are salty, hard-working and upfront people who have had it tough over the
years. Locals refer to themselves as quirquinchos (armadillos), after the
carapaces used in their charangos (traditional Bolivian ukulele-like
instruments).
The town sits against a range of low mineral-rich hills at the northern end
of the salty lakes Uru Uru and Poopó. Record-high mineral prices are
creating a boom in the city – and construction is on the rise. While many
visitors skip Oruro altogether, it’s got decent museums and there’s plenty to
see in the surrounding area. It’s also culturally very colorful, with a rich
dance and musical heritage that culminates in the riotous Carnaval
celebrations, famous throughout South America for the lavish costumes and
elaborate traditions on display.
Oruro
B2
C3
C4
C2
A3
A3
B4
A3
A5
D3
C2
B3
B4
C4
A3
B4
D3
C5
B4
C4
C3
B3
D4
D4
B3
C5
C4
C3
C3
C3
(see 16)
 Sights
1 Capilla de Serrato
2 Casa de la Cultura Simón Patiño
3 Cathedral
4 Faro de Conchupata
5 Museo Sacro, Folklórico, Arqueológico y Minero
6 Plaza del Folklore Stairway
7 Portada del Beaterio
8 Santuario de la Virgen del Socavón
9 Virgen del Socavón Statue
 Activities, Courses & Tours
10 Centro de Aprendizaje de Lenguas Modernas
11 Charlie Tours
 Sleeping
12 Hotel Briggs
13 Hotel Eden
14 Hotel Repostero
15 Hotel Virgen del Socavón
16 Plaza Flores Hotel
17 Residencial 21 de Abril
18 Residencial San Miguel
 Eating
19 Bravo’s Pizza
20 El Huerto
21 Irupana
22 La Casona
23 Las Delicias
24 Mercado Campero
25 Mercado Fermín López
26 Nayjama
27 Pagador
28 Pastelería Dumbo
29 Restaurant Ardentia
 Drinking
30 Bar Huari
Dali
D4
D3
B3
(see 16)
B4
C4
B3
D4
C5
B4
B4
C3
C5
31 Fruit Juice Stalls
 Entertainment
32 Bravo Bravo
33 Club Social Arabe
Metro
34 Palais Concert Cinema
 Shopping
35 ARAO Artesanías Oruro
36 Mercado Tradicional
 Information
37 Aduana Nacional
38 Andes Dry Cleaners
39 Banco Bisa
40 Banco de Crédito
41 Migración
42 Tourist Information Office
History
Founded in the early 17th century, Oruro owes its existence to the mineralrich 10-sq-km range of hills rising 350m behind the city. Chock-full of
copper, silver and tin, these hills still form the city’s economic backbone.
By the 1920s Bolivia’s thriving tin-mining industry rested in the hands of
three powerful capitalists. The most renowned was Simón Patiño, a mestizo
from the Cochabamba valley who became one of the world’s wealthiest men.
In 1897 Patiño purchased La Salvadora mine near the village of Uncia, east
of Oruro, which eventually became the world’s most productive tin source.
Patiño’s fortunes snowballed and by 1924 he had gained control of about
50% of the nation’s tin output.
Once secure in his wealth, Patiño emigrated from Bolivia to Britain,
where he started buying up European and North American smelters and tin
interests. As a consequence, Bolivia found itself exporting both its precious
metal and its profits. Public outcry launched a series of labor uprisings, and
set the stage for nationalization of the mines in 1952 and the subsequent
creation of the government-run Corporación Minera de Bolivia (Comibol).
CHURCH
MUSEUM
Decades of government inefficiency, corruption and low global tin prices
preceded the push for capitalización (a variation on privatization), which
eventually brought about the dissolution of Comibol in the mid-1980s. When
the last mine closed in Oruro, it was a hard hit for the city.
The price of tin went back up in the early 1990s and a handful of local
cooperative mines reopened. Then in 2008 the price of tin dropped to US$7
per pound and salaries plummeted. Things have slowly started to look up
since with more than 7% annual income growth in the area, and high mineral
and metal prices worldwide.
Orureños are extremely proud that current president Evo Morales is from
their province; he was born in Isallavi, a tiny Aymará village on the western
side of Lake Poopó, and went to secondary school in Oruro.
Dangers & Annoyances
The region has been mined since pre- Columbian times and there is an
estimated 2 million tons of mining waste sitting on the hillsides outside of
town. This waste contaminates the water, the air and the general
environment, and clashes between mining and agricultural interests are on
the rise.
Sights
The action around town tends to center on the Plaza 10 de Febrero and Plaza
del Folklore. Bolívar is the main commercial drag and a fun people-watching
walk in the evening.
Santuario de la Virgen del Socavón
Offline map Google map
(Plaza del Folklore s/n) Miners began worshiping the Virgen de Candelaria
(the patron of Oruro miners) on this site in the 16th century. The present
church, which is a 19th-century reconstruction of the 1781 original, figures
prominently in Oruro’s Carnaval as the site where good ultimately defeats
evil.
Museo Sacro, Folklórico, Arqueológico y Minero
CHURCH
Offline map Google map
(Plaza del Folklore s/n; admission both museums B$10, camera/video use
B$3/20; 9-11:15am & 3:15-5:30pm) This is an excellent double museum
attached to the Santuario de la Virgen del Socavón. Access is by guided tour
only. The tour descends from the church down to an old mining tunnel with
various tools from both colonial and modern mining eras as well as
representations of the devilish El Tío, spirit of the underground. The tour
then goes upstairs to the other part of the museum, which has a variety of
exhibits, from Wankarani-period stone llama heads to Diablada (Dance of
the Devils) costumes. Guides are knowledgeable but they often don’t speak
English – some exhibits have bilingual explanations.
CHULLPA TOMBS
A chullpa is a funerary tower or mausoleum that various Aymará groups built to house the
mummified remains of some members of their society, presumably people of high rank or esteem
within the community. The Oruro department is particularly rich in chullpas, especially along the
shores of Lago Poopó and around the Sajama area. A chullpa was constructed of stone or adobe,
and typically had a beehive-shaped opening, which nearly always faced east toward the rising
sun. The body was placed in the fetal position along with various possessions. Some communities
would ritually open the chullpas on feast days and make offerings to the mummified ancestors;
the Chipaya still do. Most of the tombs, however, have been looted, apart from some bones here
and there, and the mummies can now be found in museums, such as the Museo Antropoló- gico
Eduardo López Rivas ( Click here ) in Oruro. The biggest concentration is found along the road
from Patacamaya to Chile. There are also between 18 and 25 chullpas along the Lauca circuit (
Click here ).
Cathedral
Offline map Google map
(Sorria Galvarro s/n) Just east of Plaza 10 Febrero, the cathedral has fine
stained glass above the altar. The adjacent tower was constructed by the
Jesuits as part of a church built before Oruro was founded. When the Jesuits
were expelled, it was designated as the cathedral of the Oruro bishopric. In
1994, the original baroque entrance was moved and reconstructed at the
Santuario de la Virgen del Socavón, which presents a grand city view.
LOOKOUT
CHURCH
MUSEUM
CHURCH
MUSEUM
Plaza del Folklore Stairway
Offline map Google map
(Plaza del Folklore) Just up from the Plaza del Folklore there’s a stairway
that takes you huffing and puffing to a handful of interesting murals and a
dangerous-looking three-story slide.
Capilla de Serrato
Offline map Google map
Capilla de Serrato, a steep climb from the end of Calle Washington, offers
impressive city views.
Casa de la Cultura Simón Patiño
Offline map Google map
(S Galvarro 5755; admission B$8; 8:30-11:30am & 2:30-6pm Mon-Fri,
9am-2:30pm Sat) The former residence of tin baron Simón Patiño includes
his furniture, personal bric-a-brac, fine toys (you’re not allowed to play with
them though) and an ornate art nouveau stairway. Visiting exhibitions are
featured in the downstairs lobby; the permanent collection is on the upper
level. Entry is by guided tour only.
Portada del Beaterio
Offline map Google map
(Soria Galvarro s/n) A couple of blocks southeast of Plaza 10 de Febrero,
it’s worth checking out the Portada del Beaterio, the facade of a convent
church carved with ornate vegetal and bird motifs.
Museo Antropológico Eduardo López Rivas
(España s/n; admission B$3; 8am-noon & 2-6pm Mon-Fri, 10am-6pm Sat
& Sun) At the south end of town adjacent to the zoo, the Museo
Antropológico Eduardo López Rivas is an anthropological and
archaeological museum well worth a visit. The fascinating hodge- podge of
exhibits includes mastodons, Carnaval costumes, stone-carved llama heads,
mummies from the chullpares (funerary towers) that dot the region and
skulls exhibiting the horrific cranial deformations once practiced on
MUSEUM
MUSEUM
MONUMENT
children. Take any micro (half-sized bus) marked ‘Sud’ from the northwest
corner of Plaza 10 de Febrero or opposite the train station and get off just
beyond the old tin-foundry compound.
Museo Mineralógico
(Ciudad Universitaria; admission B$10; 8:30am-noon & 2:30-6pm MonFri, weekends by appointment) On the university campus south of town, the
Museo Mineralógico houses a remarkable collection of more than 5200
minerals, precious stones, fossils and crystals from around the world, housed
in wooden cabinets amid a series of stairways, exposed bricks and glass.
Hop on minibus 102 or 2 or any micro marked ‘Sud’ or ‘Ciudad
Universitaria’ from opposite the train station or Plaza 10 de Febrero.
Museo Casa Arte Taller Cardozo Velasquez
( 527-5245; juegueoruro@hotmail.com; Junín 738; admission B$8; no
specific hours, call ahead) A family of seven artists – Gonzalo (sculptor), his
wife María (potter) and their five daughters – open their whimsical little
house and art studio to visitors. The tour includes a peek into their
workshop, the many nooks and crannies with artsy bric-a-brac and a leafy
patio with Gonzalo’s fascinating sculptures – check out the one in the
middle, devoted to Pachamama (Mother Earth). If you’re lucky, you may
even get a tea made with medicinal herbs from their courtyard garden. On
Sunday mornings, the family goes out to the streets to paint with children.
Every first Friday of the month, they hold a k’oa ceremony, an Andean ritual
that pays respect to Pachamama, which you are welcome to join if you
announce yourself.
Faro de Conchupata
Offline map Google map
(Montechinos s/n) On November 17, 1851 Bolivia’s red, gold and green flag
was first raised at Faro de Conchupata: red for the courage of the Bolivian
army, gold for the country’s mineral wealth and green for its agricultural
wealth. The spot is now marked by a platform and column topped by an
enormous glass globe, illuminated at night. It provides a fine vista over the
town.
Mina San José MINE
There are numerous mines in the Oruro area, many operated by cooperativos
(small groups of miners who purchase temporary rights). One of the most
important is Mina San José, which has been in operation for over 450 years.
Now run by six cooperativos, they have opened a part of the mine to tourists.
The tour, which is available in Spanish only, lasts about three hours and
costs B$50. English tours are available through Charlie Tours ( Click here )
for B$250, with transport and guide. To get there, you can take a yellow
micro (marked ‘D’ or ‘San José’) or the light-blue mini (B$5) from the
northwest corner of Plaza 10 de Febrero.
A DEVIL OF A GOOD TIME
Oruro’s Carnaval has become Bolivia’s largest and most renowned annual celebration. There are
two sides to this party of all parties. For the angels in all of us, there are processions, dances and
religious pageantry; for our inner devil, there’s plenty of drinking and debauchery in what is one
of the biggest water fights the world has ever seen.
In a broad sense, these festivities can be described as reenactments of the triumph of good over
evil, but the festival is so interlaced with threads of Christian and indigenous myths, fables,
deities and traditions that it would be inaccurate to oversimplify it this way.
The origins of a similar festival may be traced back to the medieval kingdom of Aragón,
although orureños (Oruro locals) maintain that it commemorates an event that occurred during
the early days of their own fair city. Legend has it that one night a thief called Chiruchiru was
seriously wounded by a traveler he’d attempted to rob. Taking pity on the wrongdoer, the Virgen
de Candelaria gently helped him reach his home near the mine at the base of Cerro Pié del Gallo
and succored him until he died. When the miners found him there, an image of the Virgin hung
over his head. Today, the mine is known as the Socavón de la Virgen (Grotto of the Virgin), and
a large church, the Santuario de la Virgen del Socavón, has been built over it to house the
Virgin, the patron saint of the city. Above the Canal de Desagüe, a massive statue of the Virgen
del Socavón (Virgin of the Grotto) is being built; it should be completed by the time you read
this.
This legend is combined with the ancient Uru tale of Huari and the struggle of Archangel
Michael (San Miguel) against the seven deadly sins.
Ceremonies begin several weeks before Carnaval itself, there are various candlelit processions,
and dance groups practice boisterously in the city’s streets.
As well as traditional Bolivian dance groups, such as the Caporales, Llameradas, Morenadas
and Tinkus, Oruro’s Carnaval features La Diablada (Dance of the Devils).
The main event kicks off on the Saturday before Ash Wednesday with the spectacular entrada
(entrance procession) led by the brightly costumed San Miguel character. Behind him, dancing
ROCK CLIMBING
LANGUAGE COURSE
and marching, come the famous devils and a host of bears and condors. The procession is
followed by vehicles adorned with jewels (in commemoration of the achura rites in which the
Inca offered their treasures to Inti, the sun, in the festival of Inti Raymi), and the miners offer the
year’s highest-quality mineral to El Tío, the demonic owner of all underground minerals and
precious metals.
When the archangel and the devils arrive at the soccer stadium, they engage in a series of
dances that tell the story of the ultimate battle between good and evil. After it becomes apparent
that good has triumphed over evil, the dancers retire to the Santuario de la Virgen del Socavón at
dawn on the Sunday, and a Mass is held in honor of the Virgen, who pronounces that good has
prevailed.
There’s another, less spectacular entrada on the Sunday afternoon, and more dance displays on
the Monday. The next day, Shrove Tuesday, is marked by family reunions and cha’lla libations,
in which alcohol is sprinkled over worldly goods to invoke a blessing. The following day people
make their way into the surrounding countryside where four rock formations – the Toad, the
Viper, the Condor and the Lizard – are also subjected to cha’lla as an offering to Pachamama.
Tickets typically cost between B$80 and B$230 for the seats along Av 6 de Agosto. On the
main plaza, prime seats cost between B$320 and $450.
Activities
Club de Montañismo Halcones
(cmh_oruro@yahoo.com) Rumi Campana (Bell Rock), named after an
unusual acoustic phenomenon, is a climber’s playground just 2km northwest
of town. On weekends you can practice your skills with the friendly local
climbing club, Club de Montañismo Halcones. There’s a range of routes
with protection already in place. Try your hand at the challenging
overhanging routes of the Angel sector. For softer routes, try the Vieja
Palestra sector.
Courses
Centro de Aprendizaje de Lenguas Modernas
Offline map Google map
( 528-7676; Pagador 5635; per hr $B40) Drop by for Quechua or Spanish
classes.
GUIDED TOUR
HOTEL
HOTEL
Tours
There’s a wealth of things to explore in the wild reaches of Oruro
department. Tour operators can arrange custom excursions or simpler trips to
nearby sites such as Calacala ( Click here ) or the Termas de Obrajes hot
springs ( Click here ).
Charlie Tours
Offline map Google map
( 524-0666; charlietours@yahoo.com) Run by the knowledgeable Juan
Carlos Vargas, Charlie Tours is a real specialist in the region. In addition to
city tours, mine visits and excursions to nearby attractions such as Calacala
and Termas de Obrajes, it offers trips to places further afield, including the
Chipaya, Salar de Coipasa and Sajama. The offices are outside of town, so
call or email.
Sleeping
Accommodations are often booked solid during Carnaval, when there’s also
a three-night minimum stay. It’s wise to reserve well ahead of time or ask the
tourist office about rooms in local homes. Expect to pay up to five or six
times the normal price for a room.
Hotel Virgen del Socavón $$
Offline map Google map
( 528-2184; www.hotelvirgendelsocavon.com; Junín 1179; s/d/ste incl
breakfast B$280/380/480; ) One of the best hotels in town, this modern
option has rooms looking right onto the Plaza del Folklore, making it the
most sought-after in town at Carnaval time when prices spike tenfold.
Outside Carnaval season, it’s a good option, with new bedspreads,
modernish decor (with plastic chairs) and excellent balconies overlooking
the plaza.
Plaza Flores Hotel $$
Offline map Google map
HOSTEL
HOTEL
HOTEL
BUSINESS HOTEL
( 525-2561; www.floresplazahotel.com; Mier 735; s/d/tr incl breakfast
B$210/300/460; ) A top midrange choice right on the main plaza, this
eight-story, three-star hotel offers recently renovated rooms, good city views
and friendly management. Request a room on a higher floor for better views.
Residencial 21 de Abril $
Offline map Google map
( 527-9205; simon21deabril@bolivia.com; Montecinos 198; d B$50, dm/r
per person without bathroom B$40/50; ) Probably your best budget bet,
this friendly family-run spot is a short walk from the center with bright and
tidy rooms, TV and hot water available all day. There’s a sauna for guests’
use.
Hotel Sumaj Wasi $$
( 527-6737; www.hotelessamaywasi.com; Brasil 232; s/d B$160/220;
) This attractive business-style hotel near the bus terminal has large rooms
offering tiled floors, decent bathrooms with plenty of hot water and cable
TV. There is a lingering smell of detergent but, hey, at least you know it’s
clean. Ask for a room with a patio view.
Hotel Briggs $$$
Offline map Google map
( 525-1724; www.s-hotelbriggs.com.bo; Washington 1206; s/d/tr/ste incl
breakfast B$320/480/600/800; ) Centrally located across Mercado
Fermín López, this slightly overpriced option has comfortable, smallish
rooms. Some have a private terrace and Jacuzzi, and all have toasty heating.
Hotel Eden $$$
Offline map Google map
( 521-0671; www.hoteleden.com; cnr Bolívar and Presidente Montes;
s/d/tr/ste incl breakfast B$560/840/952/980; ) If you’re looking for a
business-style hotel, this is it. Big beds (check), flat-screen TVs (check),
clean and modern bathrooms, pool, onsite restaurant and casino (check,
check, check and check). What’s missing is a bit of soul. But who needs soul
when you’ve got cable TV?
HOTEL
HOTEL
HOTEL
MARKET
Hotel Bernal $
( 527-9468; Brasil 701; s/d/tr B$85/130/170) Opposite the bus terminal,
this budget option has soft beds, limpid pillows and slightly dirty sheets. The
baths are tight, but have a good supply of hot water.
Hotel Repostero $
Offline map Google map
( 525-8001; ph_tania@hotmail.com; Sucre 370; s/d/tr incl breakfast
B$150/200/230; ) You’ll love the sign at this faded but likeable old
place. It has a variety of ever so slightly smoky rooms in two wings, all with
cable TV and pretty nice hot showers. The third-story rooms are the best.
Residencial San Miguel $
Offline map Google map
( 527-2132; Sucre 331; s/d without bathroom B$30/50) The cheapest place
in town is handy for both the train station and the center, but it’s pretty rock
bottom in terms of comfort. Hot water is sporadic and rooms are tiny. But at
least the threadbare sheets seem to be clean.
Eating
Local specialties include thimpu de cordero (a mutton-and-vegetable
concoction smothered with llajua, a hot tomato-based sauce) and
charquekan (sun-dried llama meat with corn, potatoes, eggs and cheese).
Note that most restaurants are closed on Sunday evening, except the fastfood places along the main plaza.
Mercado Campero $
Offline map Google map
(food B$5-15; 6am-8pm) There are rows of lunch spots at this market, as
well as drinks stalls serving mate (a herbal infusion of coca, chamomile or
similar), api (a local drink made of maize) and coffee. You will find similar
offerings at Mercado Fermín López Offline map Google map (food B$5-15;
6am-8pm).
INTERNATIONAL
BOLIVIAN
Restaurant Ardentia $
Offline map Google map
(S Galvarro; mains B$17-27; 6:30-11pm Mon-Sat) We don’t know how
Halle Berry would feel about the restaurant using her likeness for its
publicity, but copyright infringement issues aside, this is probably one of the
best restaurants in town. It has a thoughtfully prepared lasagna, simple but
savory chicken and beef dishes, and familiar standards such as hamburgers.
Surely Halle would approve.
Nayjama $$
Offline map Google map
(cnr Aldana & Pagador; mains B$30-55; closed for dinner Sun) This
appealing choice serves high-quality traditional orureño food with a dash of
innovation. The servings are huge, so ask for half a portion of anything you
order. Lamb is the specialty, as is cabeza (sheep’s head served with salad and
dehydrated potatoes). The English menu is slightly more expensive so ask
for the Spanish one.
ANDEAN CAMELIDS
There’s nothing like them on earth – playful, elegant, independent, ecological and cute as hell –
the camelids of the Andes are the species that define a continent.
Unlike the Old World, the western hemisphere had few grazing mammals after the Pleistocene
era, when mammoths, horses and other large herbivores disappeared from North and South
America. For millennia, the Andean people relied on the New World camelids – the wild guanaco
and vicuña, and the domesticated llama and alpaca – for food, fiber and companionship.
Both of the domesticated varieties are highly ecological, friendly animals. Cross the Altiplano
and you are likely to see perfect circles of llama poop. Yes, in order to fulfill their Darwinian
obligations, llamas and alpacas all poop in the same place, protecting the delicate Andean high
plains from turning into a veritable desert. They also emit less noxious gas than other livestock –
not insignificant considering that 18% of the world’s CO2 emissions come from livestock
according to the Food and Agricultural Organization, and most of that comes from the 1.5 billion
cows now living on our little blue planet. Don’t want to become a vegan just yet? No worries, the
low CO2-emitting llamas also have low-fat, zero-cholesterol meat. And it tastes great –
somewhere between beef and lamb – whether in a stew, steak or jerky.
Until just recently, many Bolivian pastoralists had fairly large llama herds, but they kept them
more as pets and pack animals, only sacrificing animals on occasion for big feasts. This asset-
ITALIAN
BOLIVIAN
rich, cash-poor scenario – llamas are worth about $100 each, and most high-plains ranchers have
herds of around 80 head – prompted the Bolivian government to invest heavily in camelids
through projects like Proyecto Vale (www.proyectovale.com, in Spanish) that look to protect the
environment, reduce desertification and provide new uses for camelids throughout the high
plains. Now, with demand rising on international markets for llama meat and alpaca and vicuña
wool, many Bolivian ranchers are also turning back to their Inca roots and getting rid of their
sheep and cattle herds in favor of alpacas and llamas.
Species at a Glance
Vicuña (Vicugna vicugna) Nearly hunted to extinction for their fine wool – once reserved
exclusively for Inca emperors – the delicate rusty-orange vicuña are rebounding throughout the
Andes. Innovative catch-and-shear programs and increased patrols have cut down on poaching,
and there are now around 350,000 vicuña across Argentina, Bolivia, Chile, Ecuador and Peru.
Bolivia has around 60,000, and the populations are on the rise. You are likely to see them in
Parque Nacional Sajama, Reserva Nacional de Fauna Andina Eduardo Avaroa, Área Natural de
Manejo Integrado Nacional Apolobamba and in other wild areas above 4000m. Ongoing threats
to the vicuña include a lack of continuous protected areas, degraded land and poaching (vicuña
blood is believed to cure all kinds of ailments, and the wool is worth US$400 on local markets
and up to US$2000 on international markets per pound).
Guanaco (Lama guanicoe) These wily brownish animals are rarely seen in Bolivia, even though
they will inhabit a much wider range than their wild vicuña cousins: from sea level up to 4000m
or higher. They are sometimes seen in the highland plains of the Reserva Nacional de Fauna
Andina Eduardo Avaroa.
Alpaca (Vicugna pacos) These domesticated animals are prized for their fine wool, used to make
shawls, sweaters and scarves. Smaller and more delicate than their llama brethren, alpacas require
well-watered grasslands and are more common in lower elevations.
Llama (L glama) The taller, rangier and hardier llama has relatively coarse wool that is used for
blankets, ropes and other household goods. It also works as a pack animal, but thanks to the
introduction of the camión (flatbed truck), llama trains are increasingly rare in Bolivia. Llamas
can survive in dry, poor pastures, making them ideal for the harsh Altiplano.
La Casona $
Offline map Google map
(Montes 5969; pizzas from B$20) Straight-out-of-the-oven salteñas (meat
and vegetable pasties), quick sandwiches for lunch, and pizza and pasta for
dinner keep this little place buzzing, especially at night when it gets really
busy and warm.
Las Delicias $$
Offline map Google map
BOLIVIAN
SELF-CATERING
BOLIVIAN
BAKERY
CAFE
PIZZERIA
(6 de Agosto 1284; almuerzo B$13-25, mains B$28-50) Of the several
churrasquerías (grilled meat restaurants) on this long street, Las Delicias is
the best, with attentive service, sizzling tableside parrilladas (plates of
mixed grilled meats), great almuerzos (set lunches) and a pleasant covered
patio.
El Fogon $
(Brasil 5021; mains B$25) One of your best bets in town for charquekan,
this glossy diner-style eatery may feel like a chain, but locals love it.
Irupana $
Offline map Google map
(S Galvarro 5891) This health-food chain has a great selection of nutritious
snacks – but not a Nacho Cheese Dorito in sight.
Pagador $
Offline map Google map
(Pagador 1440; almuerzo B$15, mains B$25-45) This no-frills restaurant is
deservedly popular with locals. The fixed lunch is especially good on the
covered patio outside.
Pastelería Dumbo $
Offline map Google map
(Junín, near 6 de Octubre; almuerzo B$9; closed Sat & Sun) A decent
quick stop for cakes, empanadas, salteñas, hot drinks and helados (ice
creams).
El Huerto $
Offline map Google map
(Bolívar near Pagador; almuerzo B$10; closed Sat) Tasty cakes, snacks
and cooked-to-order vegetarian lunches are served at this friendly hole-inthe-wall.
Bravo’s Pizza $
BAR
CAFE
JUICE BAR
LIVE MUSIC
DANCE
Offline map Google map
(cnr Bolívar & S Galvarro; pizzas B$19-30, pastas B$28-45) Bright, with
big windows overlooking the square and a light ambience, this 2nd-floor
eatery has 20 varieties of pizza, including a spicy one with dried llama meat,
plus hamburgers, sandwiches, burritos and breakfasts (B$20).
Drinking & Entertainment
Bar Huari
Offline map Google map
(Junín 608, cnr S Galvarro) Not much seems to have changed in this
traditional bar since the 1930s – locals still while away the even- ings
playing games and drinking beer in its series of high-ceilinged rooms. There
are cheap almuerzos (B$10) and dinner options.
Dali
Offline map Google map
(Plaza 10 de Febrero, 2nd floor; 10am-2am) About as hoity-toity as you
can get in Oruro, this stylish and popular cafe caters to Oruro’s young set.
Come for the drinks – not the food.
Fruit Juice Stalls
Offline map Google map
(V Galvarro) On hot days, locals flock to the row of excellent fruit juice
stalls opposite the Mercado Campero.
Club Social Arabe
Offline map Google map
(Junín 729; closed Sun) A slice of old-fashioned Oruro, this 2nd-floor
spot hosts occasional live music on weekends.
Metro
Offline map Google map
KARAOKE
CINEMA
MARKET
ARTS & CRAFTS
(Plaza 10 de Febrero, basement) This subterranean nightclub caters to
Oruro’s youngsters. Expect a lot of boom, boom, boom.
Bravo Bravo
Offline map Google map
(Montecinos near Pagador) The best karaoke in town is run by the owners
of Bravo’s Pizza.
Palais Concert Cinema
Offline map Google map
(Plaza 10 de Febrero) Housed in an opulent baroque-style, colonial-era
concert hall, this no-name cinema was closed for renovations at the time of
writing, but should screen first-run films nightly.
Shopping
The design, creation and production of artistic Diablada (Dance of the Devil)
masks and costumes is the main focus of retail in Oruro. Av La Paz, between
León and Villarroel, is lined with small workshops offering devil masks,
headdresses, costumes and other devilish things.
Hawkers sell cheap zampoñas (pan flutes made of hollow reeds),
charangos and other indigenous musical instruments near the train station.
A street market takes over the streets surrounding Mercado Fermín López
on Wednesday and Saturday.
Mercado Tradicional
Offline map Google map
(middle row, Mercado Fermín López) The impressive Mercado Tradicional
has more dried llama fetuses and flamingo wings than a voodoo master has
pins. The affable vendors are more than happy to explain the usage of their
wares, but make sure to ask if you want to take a photo.
For more herbal remedies and witchcraft items, head to Calle Junín
between V Galvarro and 6 de Agosto.
ARAO Artesanías Oruro
Offline map Google map
(Mier 5999) This place offers an excellent selection of high-quality,
cooperatively produced handicrafts from four communities in the Oruro
department.
Information
Emergency
Tourist police ( 528-7774) Round-the-clock operation at the bus terminal;
shares the kiosk with the tourist info point and gives out maps.
Immigration
Migración Offline map Google map ( 527-0239; S Galvarro, btwn Ayacucho
& Cochabamba; 8:30am-12:30pm & 2:30-6:30pm Mon-Fri) Extend your
stay here – it’s the last door on the left.
Internet Access
There are plenty of places to get online in Oruro (for about B$3 per hour).
Many also offer cheap international calls.
Laundry
Andes Dry Cleaners Offline map Google map (Sucre 240, at Pagador; per kg
B$10) Offers a 24-hour service.
Medical Services
Policlínica Oruro ( 524-2871; Rodríguez, btwn La Paz & 6 de Octubre)
Near Plaza la Unión, this is Oruro’s best hospital.
Money
There are several banks with ATMs in town (as well as change kiosks at the
bus and train stations), which will change several currencies, including euros
(at a pretty poor rate). There are several Western Union offices.
Banco Bisa Offline map Google map (Plaza 10 de Febrero) Cashes Amex
traveler’s checks into bolivianos without commission (for US dollars, there’s
a US$6 fee).
Banco de Crédito Offline map Google map (Plaza 10 de Febrero) ATM issues
US dollars or bolivianos.
Post
Post office (Av Presidente Montes) The main post office is just north of
Plaza 10 de Febrero. Parcels must first be inspected by the Aduana Nacional
(Customs; Velasco Galvarro at Junín), which is located where the city’s fort
once stood.
Telephone
Entel (Calle Bolívar, Plaza 10 de Febrero area) The modern Entel office is
west of the corner of Soña Galvarro and Bolívar; there are numerous other
call centers around town. There’s also a Punto Entel and last-minute postal
kiosk downstairs at the bus terminal.
Tourist Information
Tourist information office Offline map Google map (Caseta de Información
Turística; across from bus terminal and train station) These booths give out
city maps and leaflets – tourist police are occasionally on hand.
Getting There & Away
Bus
All long-distance buses use the bus terminal ( 527-9535; terminal fee
B$1.50), a 15-minute walk or short cab ride northeast of Oruro’s center. To
get here, head north on S de Agosto until you hit Aroma, then turn left and
continue walking for a few blocks. There’s a casa de cambio (moneychanging office) on the upper level, luggage storage (B$5) on the ground
floor and a sporadically open tourist info kiosk, which provides maps.
Buses to La Paz depart every half-hour, and there are several departures
for Cochabamba, Potosí and Sucre. For Santa Cruz, you must make a
connection in Cochabamba. Night buses to Uyuni leave between 7pm and
8pm – they are freezing cold, so bring a sleeping bag.
There is daily service to Arica, Calama and Iquique in Chile, which
generally departs in the evening.
BUS COSTS & DISTANCES
DESTINATION COST (B$) DURATION (HR)
Arica (Chile) 100 10
Calama (Chile) 130 20
Cochabamba 20 4
Iquique (Chile) 80 8
La Paz 20 3
Potosí 25 5
Sucre 80 8
Tarija 70 20
Tupiza 60 12
Uyuni 30–35 8
Train
Trains run south from Oruro to Villazón on the border with Argentina,
passing through Uyuni, Atocha and Tupiza along the way. The Expreso del
Sur is slightly more luxurious, departing Oruro on Tuesdays and Fridays.
Cheaper service is had on the Wara Wara line, leaving Oruro on Wednesdays
and Sundays. There is return service from Villazón on Mondays,
Wednesdays, Thursdays and Saturdays. From Uyuni, you can get slow trains
to Calama in Chile.
Buy tickets at least a day ahead from the train station ( 527-4605;
www.fca.com.bo; 8:15-11:30am & 2:30-6pm Mon & Thu, 8:15am-6pm
Tue & Fri, 8:15am-noon & 2:30-7pm Wed, 8:15-11:30am & 3-7pm Sun).
Don’t forget to bring your passport. On train days, there’s a left-luggage
kiosk here. Watch your belongings on the train, and bring a sleeping bag.
EXPRESO DEL SUR
RUN COST (COACH/1ST) FROM ORURO TUE & FRI
Oruro–Uyuni B$ 56/112 3:30-10:20pm
Uyuni–Atocha B$ 77/168 10:40pm-12:45am
Atocha–Tupiza B$ 101/224 12:55-4am
Tupiza–Villazón B$ 119/261 4:10-7:05am
WARA WARA
RUN COST (NORMAL/COACH/1ST) FROM ORURO WED & SUN
Oruro–Uyuni B$ 32/44/95 7pm-2:20am
Uyuni–Atocha B$ 42/57/126 2:50-5am
Atocha–Tupiza B$ 56/75/170 5:20-8:35am
Tupiza–Villazón B$ 67/94/205 9:05am-12:05pm
Getting Around
Micros (half-sized buses; B$0.80 to B$1.50) and minibuses (B$1) connect
the city center with outlying areas. Their routes are designated by their
letters, colors and signs (and in the case of minibuses, numbers). It’s a fairly
confusing system so check with the driver before boarding. Note that micros
and minibuses are small and crowded so, if possible, avoid carrying luggage
aboard.
Taxis around the center, including to and from the terminals, cost a nonnegotiable B$3. Radio taxis ( 527-7775) cost around B$4.
AROUND ORURO
There’s plenty to see around Oruro, particularly along the road south toward
Uyuni, where bleak and epic scenery surrounds old mines and the remnants
of ancient lakeside cultures. These areas can be visited by bus from Oruro
or on a tour.
The Termas de Obrajes hot springs (admission B$10), 25km northeast
of town, is a popular destination. It’s a well-run complex, with a pool and a
private rooms with tubs that you can rent by the half-hour. There’s an
unspectacular restaurant adjacent to a modest hotel. From the corner of
Caro and Av 6 de Agosto, catch an Obrajes micro (B$7, 30 minutes) from
7:30am to 5pm daily, which passes the grungier Capachos hot springs
(admission B$3), 10km east of town. The last micro to Oruro departs at
4pm.
The atmospheric Calacala (admission B$40) makes a worthwhile trip
from Oruro. The site consists of a series of rock paintings of llamas and
humans in red and orange tones, presumably dating from the first
millennium BC. It’s located under an overhang 2.5km beyond the village of
Calacala, which is 26km east of Oruro. Stop in the village to locate the
guard who has the keys and collects the fee; she can often be found in the
small cafe marked by a rusted Pepsi sign. The site itself is a 30-minute walk
past the village, near the old brewery. The views from the site of the
exceptionally beautiful valley, which provides some of Oruro’s water, are
spectacular. There’s no public transport unless it’s the feast day of Señor de
la Laguna (Lord of the Lake) on September 14; a taxi there and back will
cost you B$120.
Poopó, a tough mining town halfway between Oruro and Uyuni, offers
authentic glimpses of Andean life, plus hot springs and a resort-style hotel.
There are mining ruins at the entry to town that are haunting to say the
least.
PARQUE NACIONAL SAJAMA
Bolivia’s first national park occupies 1000 sq km abutting the Chilean
border. The park offers expansive high-plains views, geyser fields, hot
springs, and climbing and hiking opportunities aplenty.
Parque Nacional Sajama was created on November 5, 1945 for the
protection of the rare wildlife that inhabit this northern extension of the
Atacama Desert. Unfortunately, depredation has already eliminated several
species. With increased protection, however, vicuña populations are on the
rise – they were nearly hunted to extinction for their highly prized wool. You
may also spot condors, flamingos, rheas and armadillos.
The world’s highest forest covers the foothills flanking the awe-inspiring
Volcán Sajama which, at 6542m, is Bolivia’s highest peak. The forest
consists of dwarf queñua trees, an endemic and ancient Altiplano species.
But while technically a forest, it’s a little underwhelming – the ‘trees’ look
more like little bushes!
VOLCANO
Sights & Activities
The best map of the park is the glossy 1:50,000 Nevado Sajama published by
Walter Guzmán Córdova; it can be found in better La Paz bookstores.
Volcán Sajama
The volcano is a popular mountain to climb, especially between May and
September; there are also some hikes on its lower slopes. Although it’s a
SWIMMING
GEYSER
LAKE
relatively straightforward climb, Sajama’s altitude and icy conditions make
the peak more challenging than it initially appears. Quite a few La Paz
agencies offer organized climbs of Sajama. Only consider going without a
guide if you have experience with high-altitude climbing, but prepare for
extremely cold and icy conditions and carry lots of water close to your body
(otherwise it will freeze). Do not try to climb the volcano in the rainy
season; the electrical storms make this a dangerous time to ascend.
LAUCA
This growing tourist circuit near Parque Nacional Sajama is slowly attracting visitors. It’s
organized between three communities – Macaya, Julo and Sacabaya – that are trying to promote
the area and boost their income. Highlights include several lagoons with flamingos and about 25
painted chullpas (funerary towers) that were erected between 1470 and 1540. The area is difficult
to visit independently so your best bet is to go with Bolivia Millenaria ( Click here ); the tour can
be done in about four hours from Sajama National Park and costs B$425, with jeep transportation,
entrance fee and lunch. You can ask to be dropped off in Tambo Quemado if continuing on to
Chile.
Hot Springs
(B$30) For a relaxing warm soak, there are four lovely 35°C hot springs
8km northwest of Sajama village, an easy 45-minute walk; look for the
bright orange house to the left of the road. Ask at your hotel about other
undeveloped hot springs in the area – there are several.
Geyser Field
About 7km (1½ hours on foot) due west of Sajama is an interesting spouting
geyser field. You could potentially combine this with a two- or three-day
trekking circuit that takes you from the village of Sajama past the Lagunas
Khasira, Sora and Chiar Khota.
Laguna Huañakota
LODGE
LODGE
About 12km north of the village of Sajama, this lake is worth a day trip.
Sleeping & Eating
Most people stay in the village of Sajama (4250m). Camping is fine just
about anywhere in this sparsely populated region, so a tent and a good coldweather sleeping bag are recommended. You can also contact the tourism
office ( 513-5526; tatasajama@hotmail.com; SERNAP headquarters) in
Sajama village about homestays (per person B$35-55) with local families.
There are numerous hotels in town, each serving breakfast (B$16), lunch
(B$20) and dinner (B$20).
Hostal Sajama $
( 7150-9185; eliseosajama@hotmail.com; southern entrance to Sajama
village; r per person B$70) With traditional-style thatched-roof huts, firm
beds, clean sheets and electric heaters (nice!), this is your best bet in town.
The arched ceilings give a feeling of openness to the otherwise tight rooms,
with Andean textiles adding to the overall charm. Even with the electric
heat, you may wish to bring a sleeping bag. Meals are B$16 to B$20.
Albergue Ecoturístico Tomarapi $$$
( in La Paz 2-241-4753; www.millenariantours.com/tours/eco-hostels; s/d
B$400/550) Albergue Ecoturístico Tomarapi, on the northern border of the
park, 12km beyond Sajama, is an enticing community-run 35-bed ecolodge,
which offers the area’s most comfortable accommodations. It has been
widely cited as an ideal model for community involvement in tourism
projects, with about 31 families from the nearby village of Caripe working at
the lodge on a rotational basis. Occupying a lovely thatched building, styled
along traditional local architectural lines, it boasts simple, comfortable
rooms with private baths and hot water and a very welcome log fire. It also
offers excellent food, featuring lots of alpaca meat. Rates include two meals
per day. A two-day program from La Paz is available for B$1020 per person,
including three meals per day, private transportation, a bilingual guide and
visits to attractions in Sajama National Park.
Information
Park admission (B$30, for which you are also provided with a small map) is
payable at the Servicio Nacional de Areas Protegidas (SERNAP)
headquarters in the sleepy Sajama village, 18km north of the Arica–La Paz
highway. The fee applies to all foreigners, including those just visiting the
village. SERNAP will help climbing expeditions organize mules and porters
to carry equipment to the base camp; guides cost around B$560 per day,
porters about B$140 for the climb.
Getting There & Away
There is a daily bus from the town of Patacamaya to Sajama village (B$25,
12pm, 3½ hours); a return bus departs Sajama village at 6am. Patacamaya is
easily reached on most buses from La Paz to Cochabamba, Oruro and Arica.
La Paz–Arica buses pass through Parque Nacional Sajama – the border
crossing between Tambo Quemado (Bolivia) and Chungará (Chile) 12km
away is straightforward and open from 8am till 8pm. You could conceivably
ask the bus driver to drop you at the park entrance and walk the 11km into
Sajama village, or call the Hostal Sajama and ask for a lift.
CURAHUARA DE CARANGAS
This scenic village halfway between Oruro and Sajama has a lovely adobe-and-thatch church, a
community hostel, and plenty of hiking and adventure opportunities nearby. Attractions worth
visiting include the following:
Sistine Chapel of the Altiplano This lovely adobe-and-thatch church (admission B$30, inquire at
the hostel for entrance) contains a wealth of lovely naive 17th-century frescoes depicting typical
mestizo-style themes. There are plenty of Biblical scenes as well as, plus some interesting artifacts
in a small room behind the altar.
Palestra Calachua Just 2km from town, this climbing spot has interesting natural formations, and
makes for a good afternoon jaunt.
Monterani Get up early to hit the summit of this nearby mountain, which has been revered by
local indigenous communities for centuries.
Pukara de Pichaca Ask around for directions to this nearby Aymará fortress.
Accommodations options include the community-run Hostal Kory Wara ( 6708-5005;
hkorywara@hotmail.com; near the entrance to town; r per person incl breakfast B$50), which
offers cozy rooms, friendly service, a fun common area draped with Andean textiles, as well as
plenty of tips on trips to the nearby countryside. There are heaters in the rooms, but it’s still good
to bring a sleeping bag if you’ve got one.
To get here, inquire at Trans Sajama ( 7407-1385; Plaza) for the regular service to
Patacamaya (B$10, 2½ hours). You can also grab an Arica-bound bus from La Paz and ask to be
dropped at the cruce (crossroads), where you can hump it the 5km into town or get a taxi (B$25).
UYUNI & THE SOUTHWEST
CIRCUIT
Bolivia’s southwestern corner is an awe-inspiring collection of diverse
landscapes ranging from the blinding white Salar de Uyuni salt flat to the
geothermal hotbed of Los Lípez, one of the world’s harshest wilderness
regions and an important refuge for many Andean wildlife species. The
ground here literally boils with minerals, and the spectrum of color is
extraordinary. A circuit from Uyuni takes you through absolutely
unforgettable, literally breathtaking landscapes and is the highlight of many
people’s visit to Bolivia.
Although it gets plenty of visitors, in many ways Bolivia’s southwest is
still a remote wilderness, with rough dirt roads, scattered mining settlements,
quinoa-producing villages and little public transportation. The main town,
Uyuni, is a military outpost with a real frontier feel; at times you expect the
harsh temperatures and biting winds to do away with it altogether. It’s the
launching point for expeditions into the region, from the desolate expanses
of the salares to the craggy hills of Los Lípez, which rise into the high
Andean peaks along the Chilean frontier. Way south, Tupiza has a pleasant
climate, and plenty of hiking, biking and horseback riding adventures.
Much of the region is nominally protected in the Reserva Nacional de
Fauna Andina Eduardo Avaroa, which was created in 1973, covers an area of
7150 sq km and receives in excess of 50,000 visitors annually. Its emphasis
is on preserving the vicuña and the yareta plant, both of which are threatened
in Bolivia, as well as other endemic species and unique ecosystems.
Most people visit the attractions that are part of the Southwest Circuit on
an organized trip from Uyuni or Tupiza. Apart from a couple of Entel points,
there are no phones out in the Southwest Circuit – all communication is by
radio. Any phone numbers listed in this section are for offices located in
Uyuni. Note that the toilet facilities in most stops along the way cost B$5.
Uyuni
POP 18,700 / ELEV 3669M (12,037FT)
Seemingly built in defiance of the desert-like landscape, Uyuni stands
desolate yet undaunted in Bolivia’s southwestern corner. Mention Uyuni to a
Bolivian and they will whistle and emphasize harto frío (extreme cold). Yet
despite the icy conditions, Uyuni’s got a cheerful buzz about it with
hundreds of travelers passing through every week to kick off their tour of the
Salar de Uyuni or the Southwest Circuit.
Although there’s not much to see here, and the wind chill can strip your
soul bare as you pace the wide streets, Uyuni’s isolated position and outlook
elicit an affectionate respect from both Bolivians and foreign travelers.
Founded in 1889 by Bolivian president Aniceto Arce, Uyuni remains an
important military base. Tourism and mining are the other major sources of
employment in the town. The world’s largest lithium reserve – about 100
million tons – lies beneath the neighboring salt flat, and could potentially
fuel all the iPods and electric cars the world could build over the next
century. While work on building extraction and processing facilities has
been slow going, expect more and more mining activity near Uyuni in
coming years.
B3
B2
Uyuni
 Sights
1 Clock Tower
2 Museo Arqueología y Antropológico de los Andes Meridionales
C3
C3
C3
A1
(see 14)
B4
C3
C2
B1
C1
C3
C3
D1
C1
(see 3)
B4
C3
C3
B3
C2
C2
(see 16)
(see 22)
C3
C3
C2
C2
(see 1)
C2
C3
A3
B3
 Activities, Courses & Tours
3 Andrea Tours
4 Cordillera Tours
5 Expediciones Empexsa
6 Fremen Tours
Hidalgo Tours
7 Toñito Tours
8 Turismo El Desierto
 Sleeping
9 HI-Salar de Uyuni
10 Hostal Aymará
11 Hostal La Magia de Uyuni
12 Hotel Avenida
13 Hotel Julia
14 Jardines de Uyuni
15 Los Girasoles Hotel
Piedra Blanca Backpackers Hostel
16 Toñito Hotel
17 Urkupiña El Cactu
 Eating
18 Arco Iris
19 Extreme Fun Pub
20 La Loco
21 Lithium Club
Minuteman Revolutionary Pizza
Restaurant 16 de Julio
22 Ristorante Italia
23 Wiphala Pub
 Information
24 Banco Nacional de Bolivia ATM
25 Banco Union ATM
Dirección de Turismo
26 Lavarap
27 Migración
28 Office of Reserva Nacional de Fauna Andina Eduardo Avaroa
29 Prodem
HISTORIC SITE
MARKET
MUSEUM
Sights
Cementerio de Trenes
The only real tourist attraction in Uyuni itself is the Cementerio de Trenes
(Train Cemetery), a large collection of historic steam locomotives and rail
cars dating back to the 18th century, when there was a rail-car factory in
Uyuni. Today they sit decaying in the yards about 3km southwest of the
modern-day station along Av Ferroviaria. They’re fun to climb on, and it’s a
nice walk from town to keep you warm. Many tours visit the train cemetery
as a first or last stop on the three-day salar circuit.
Museo Arqueología y Antropológico de los Andes Meridionales
Offline map Google map
(Arce at Colón; admission B$5; 8am-noon & 2:20-6:30pm Mon-Fri) The
Museo Arqueolo- gía y Antropológico de los Andes Meridionales is a small
affair featuring mummies, long skulls, fossils, ceramics and textiles. There
are also Spanish descriptions of the practices of mummification and cranial
deformation.
Markets
( Sun & Thu) The big market day in Uyuni is Thursday when Avenida
Potosí gets taken over by stalls selling anything from arts and crafts to
television sets; Sunday is a smaller market day.
UYUNI DAY TRIPPER
If you have a few more days in Uyuni, consider heading out to explore some of the forgotten
towns and sites around the area.
Pulcayo This semi-ghost town, 22km northeast of Uyuni, has some interesting architecture –
including the mansion of Bolivia’s 22nd President, Aniceto Arce Ruíz. There are decaying
locomotives from the area’s 18th-century heyday, cooperative mines, cool rock formations and
the potential to do low-fi mine tours with a local guide. A bus (B$5) leaves for here from in front
of Uyuni’s post office.
Colchani Sometimes included on the salar tours, this town has a small museum (B$5) dedicated
to the salt trade and a few interesting cooperative salt extraction cooperatives. If you are doing
the salt flat on your own, this is the kick-off spot.
Tours
While you can theoretically visit the Salar de Uyuni and the attractions of
the Southwest Circuit independently, it is extremely challenging due to
unreliable transport and the remoteness of the area. The vast majority of
people take an organized tour from either Uyuni or Tupiza. From the end of
December to the end of March, the salt flat floods and many agencies shut
down, and you can travel just 10km into the salt flat.
Costs
Tours cost B$700 to B$800 for three days at a standard agency, and B$800
to B$1000 at a high-end operation. Four-day and custom trips will cost
B$800 and up. The tours include a driver (who also serves as your guide,
mechanic and cook, but probably doesn’t speak English), two nights
accommodation (quality varies depending on the agency), three meals a day
and transit. You’ll also need to pay a B$30 entrance fee to Isla Incahuasi and
a B$150 fee to enter the Reserva Nacional de Fauna Andina Eduardo Avaroa
( Click here ). Those traveling on to Chile will need B$21 to B$50 for the
border crossing. Many agencies don’t accept credit cards.
What to Bring
You’ll want to bring a couple liters of water, snacks, headlamp, sunscreen,
sunglasses, sunhat, warm clothes (gloves, stocking cap,
waterproof/windproof jacket, wool socks, long underwear, sweater), cards or
a game to play at the hotels, camera and chargers. A sleeping bag is also
highly recommended. Ask your operator to include a free sleeping bag rental
in your fee. Otherwise, they cost about B$50 to rent and are really worth it.
Choosing an Agency
Generally, it doesn’t matter which agency you book with (other than the
high-end ones), as most agencies share drivers and tend to sort travelers into
groups of five or six people. This means that while you may book with
Agency A, you may end up in a car with a driver from Agency Z.
This said, you do have some power here. Talk to returning travelers,
multiple agencies and use your judgment to pick a good operator. If you are
custom-building an itinerary, have the agency put it in writing. If you can
make your own group (try the pub), you’ll be better off. The high-end
agencies have better hotels, can customize tours and have more reliable cars.
A number of travelers have died on this trip, mostly in drunk-driving
accidents – unscrupulous tour operations are not uncommon. Ask to see the
car you will be traveling in (Toyota Landcruisers are the best) and to meet
the driver ahead of time. If the agency tries to switch drivers or cars on you,
call them on it. Along the way, make sure your driver is not drinking alcohol
(and demand to switch cars if he is). It’s also a good idea to ask to see photos
of the hotel where you will be staying.
WARNING: SALAR TOURS
Operators are piled high in Uyuni: there are currently more than 80 agencies offering trips to the
salar (salt plain). Most offer Spanish-speaking drivers who take you on an identical three-day
trip. While the competition may mean more choice, it also means lowered quality as many dodgy
operators try to make a fast buck. It’s your right to negotiate but remember that cost-cutting leads
to operators cutting corners – at the expense of your safety and the environment! Common
exploits include trying to cram an extra body into the jeep (six people should be the maximum).
The results of this have included deadly accidents. At least 21 people, including 17 tourists,
have been killed in jeep accidents on the Salar de Uyuni salt plains since May 2008. There have
been alarming reports of ill-equipped vehicles without seatbelts, speeding tour operators, a lack
of emergency equipment, breakdowns, drunk drivers, poor food and service, and disregard for the
once-pristine environment of the salar.
See Choosing an Agency on Click here for tips on picking a safe and reliable operator.
Standard Tours
The most popular tour is the three-day circuit taking in the Salar de Uyuni,
Laguna Colorada, Sol de Mañana, Laguna Verde and points in between.
GUIDED TOUR
GUIDED TOUR
There are probably 20 to 50 people a day doing this trip.
You can also book a day trip for B$200 to Isla Incahuasi, but really,
you’ve come all this way, so you might as well go on with the rest of the
pilgrims.
Your driver is generally your cook, and the quality of food varies.
Vegetarians should make arrangements with the operator ahead of time (and
bring plenty of snacks just in case). Higher-end operators offer nicer hotels –
with heaters and down comforters – and better food.
Custom Tours
Check with the agency about reversing the standard circuit. That way you
will arrive at the salar early in the morning on the third day, when the
lighting is at its best.
If you have the time and cash to customize a trip, consider creating a fourday custom tour that includes a volcano climb, a visit to local communities
and a possible final drop off in Tupiza.
Another option offered by a variety of agencies is to do the three-day
circuit and then connect at Laguna Verde with an onward transfer to the
pretty town of San Pedro de Atacama in northeast Chile. This is now a
popular means of crossing between Bolivia and Chile. When booking, check
that the price of the transfer to San Pedro is included.
Tour Agencies
There are around 80 agencies in town. Here are some recommended options.
Andrea Tours
Offline map Google map
( 693-2638; www.salar-andreatours.com; Arce 27) Another office is at
Peru 200, behind the bus terminal.
Cordillera Tours
Offline map Google map
( 693-3304; www.cordilleratraveller.com; Ferroviaria 314) Good choice
for transfers to Chile.
GUIDED TOUR
GUIDED TOUR
GUIDED TOURS
PARADES
Fremen Tours
Offline map Google map
( 693-3543; www.andes-amazonia.com; Sucre 325) This upmarket option
focuses on community- based tourism, and has accommodation agreements
with the Tayka Hotels on the Salar Tour. It also offers a few ‘alternative
routes’ like a visit to a cave at Chiquini or a day with llama herders in San
Pedro de Quimes.
Hidalgo Tours
Offline map Google map
( 693-2989; www.salardeuyuni.net; Potosí 113, Hotel Jardines de Uyuni)
This upscale agency owns a couple of salt hotels.
Toñito Tours
Offline map Google map
( 693-2094; www.bolivianexpeditions.com; Ferroviaria 152) More
upmarket.
Other options include Expediciones Empexsa Offline map Google map (
693-2348; expedicion_empexsa@hotmail.com; Ferroviaria s/n) and
Turismo El Desierto Offline map Google map ( 693-3087; Ferroviaria s/n).
Festivals & Events
Annual Festival
Uyuni’s big annual festival falls on July 11 and marks the founding of the
town. Celebrations involve parades, speeches, dancing, music and, naturally,
lots of drinking.
Sleeping
The best of the bunch fill up fast in the high season so reservations are
recommended, especially if you’re chugging in on a late-night train. Only
better hotels offer heating – and you should bring a sleeping bag if you have
one. This is the frontier, and even the best hotels have heaters that fail, hot
HOTEL
HACIENDA
HACIENDA
HOTEL
water that doesn’t work and electricity that turns off. In the rainy season,
prices are slightly lower and it’s not as cold at night. Note that there are
water rations in Uyuni year-round. Do not sleep with a propane heater in
your room – you can die from the carbon monoxide.
UYUNI
Los Girasoles Hotel $$
Offline map Google map
( 693-3323; girasoleshotel@hotmail.com; Santa Cruz 155; s/d/tr
B$280/480/600) This spacious and handsome hotel has helpful service and
attractive rooms with big comfortable beds, a TV, cactus-wood paneling and
gas-heated bathrooms. It also offers a generous buffet breakfast, bike rental
(per hour B$65) and laundry service (per kilo B$20).
Jardines de Uyuni $$$
Offline map Google map
( 693-2989; www.hotelesrusticosjardines.com; Potosí 113; s/d/tr incl
breakfast B$420/525/700; ) Built around a courtyard in a delightful
rustic style, this adobe hotel has the best common areas and overall panache
in town. The rooms are on the small side and can be a bit dark, but all are
well appointed with tasteful decorations and comfy beds. Needless to say,
it’s a popular choice for high-end tour groups, so book ahead. Other pluses
include a pretty bar area, hammocks, a sauna and an indoor pool (only open
on occasion).
Hostal Aymará $$
Offline map Google map
( 693-2227; www.tamboaymara.com; Camacho s/n; s/d/ste incl breakfast
B$280/380/420; ) This stylish hacienda-style option has terrific common
areas. The rooms have local touches including Bolivian textiles. There are
also flannel sheets and electric heaters to you keep you warm. Some rooms
are a bit dark but there’s reliable hot water and the service is friendly.
Hostal La Magia de Uyuni $$
HOSTEL
HOTEL
HOSTEL
Offline map Google map
( 693-2541; www.hostalmagiauyuni.com; Colón 432; r in old section
B$140, s/d in new section incl breakfast B$210/350; ) One of the
pioneers of Uyuni tourism, this choice Hacienda- inspired hotel is a solid
midrange choice. The rooms in the older wing have bowed beds and less
creature comforts, while the newer rooms have nice antique furniture, new
beds, thick comforters and heaters.
Piedra Blanca Backpackers Hostel $
Offline map Google map
( 693-2517; piedrablanca_hostel@hotmail.com; Arce 27; dm B$55, r
with/without bathroom per person incl breakfast B$200/150) This upstart
hostel has fun common areas in a cool building that wraps around an interior
courtyard. There are three dorm rooms that sleep six to 18 people, plus a
handful of private rooms with or without attached bathrooms. The dorms are
worth it, with large pine bunks, heat (yes!), comfy mattresses and thick
comforters. You can leave your luggage here for B$3 per day. Waiting for a
train? Stop by for a hot shower (B$20) before heading on your way.
Hotel Avenida $
Offline map Google map
( 693-2078; Ferroviaria 11; s/d B$50/100, s/d/tr without bathroom
B$30/60/90) Near the train station, this place is popular for its clean,
renovated rooms, friendly staff, laundry sinks and hot showers (available
7am to 9pm, in theory). It’s good value for the price, but it doesn’t have
heating, so bring a sleeping bag (or sleeping buddy).
HI-Salar de Uyuni $
Offline map Google map
( 693-2228; cnr Potosí & Sucre; dm B$45, r per person with/without
bathroom B$100/50) This Hostelling International (HI) affiliate offers good
beds (no bunks) and all the typical hostel amenities. It’s on the dark side and
the rooms vary significantly so do check out a few. There is a TV room, a
clean shared kitchen, laundry service (per kilo B$10) and hot water (between
HOTEL
HOTEL
HOTEL
8:30am and 6pm, with a shower limit of 10 minutes per day). It can get cold
in the rooms at night.
Hotel Julia $$
Offline map Google map
( 693-2134; juliahotel5@hotmail.com; Ferroviaria at Arce; s/d/tr/q incl
breakfast B$100/200/270/ 370, s/d without bathroom B$80/140; ) This
neat and tidy option right in the center of town has heated rooms and piping
hot showers. It’s worth paying more for a room with bathroom, as these have
more light.
Toñito Hotel $$
Offline map Google map
( 693-3186; www.bolivianexpeditions.com; Ferroviaria 60; s/d
B$200/300; ) An appealing choice built around a covered central
courtyard that warms up nicely during the day, the Toñito has a set of
pleasant rooms with spacious beds and electric showers. It’s a bit overpriced,
but remains a consistent top pick among tour groups, so book ahead.
Urkupiña El Cactu $
Offline map Google map
( 693-2032; Arce 46; r B$160, s/d without bathroom B$40/70) A bit dirty
and unorganized in the common areas, this budget spot earns points for the
clean rooms (staff put in heaters before you go to bed, but don’t sleep with
them on – you could suffocate). The mattresses are a bit lumpy, and you’ll
probably be pretty cold by the AM. You gotta feel bad for their pet parrot
who must be miserable in the cold.
SALT HOTELS JUST OUTSIDE UYUNI
There are several hotels not far from Uyuni around the salar that are built of salt. These are
unique and comfortable places to stay, where nearly everything is constructed of blocks of salt
(with a few obvious exceptions).
Right on the edge of the salt, the Hotel Palacio de Sal ( 622-9512; www.palaciodesal.com;
s/d B$1190/1400; ) is a luxurious complex built almost completely out of the white condiment.
The first such hotel opened in the region, it boasts all sorts of facilities ranging from a pool and
sauna to a salt golf course (don’t bring your favorite white balls). Breakfast and dinner are
included in the rates. The hotel is booked through Hidalgo Tours in Potosí or at the Jardines de
Uyuni hotel; it comes cheaper as part of a package.
Another salty option is Luna Salada Hotel ( 278-5438; www.lunasaladahotel.com.bo; s/d
B$600/775), an award-winning place, 7km from Colchani, with 23 stylish rooms and a panoramic
restaurant.
It’s illegal to stay in the salt hotel on the way to Isla Incahausi. While people still bribe their
way into the hotel, human habitation here – including the waste you generate – can be very hard
on the environment.
SOUTHWEST CIRCUIT
On the standard tour, you will stay in a hotel made of salt the first night (just
on the edge of the salt flat). They are all basically the same, with salt
furniture, crushed salt floors and rough mattresses. The next night, you’ll
stay in a basic lodge. None have heaters, some have hot showers (for B$10
extra), and you will be cold! They generally put your whole group in one
room (sometimes couples can ask for a private room). If you are doing it
yourself, these basic hotels cost about B$30 per night.
Tayka Hoteles ( 7202-0069; www.taykahoteles.com) has four hotels
along the Southwest Circuit: Hotel Tayka de Piedra ( Click here ), del
Desierto ( Click here ), de Los Volcanes ( Click here ) and de Sal ( Click
here ). They cost about US$100 a night, with much of the money going
directly to the community, making this a top choice for green travelers. All
the Tayka hotels offer plenty of perks, such as comfortable beds with feather
duvets, heaters and solar-powered hot water in the rooms, as well as
restaurants serving tasty meals (such as llama steaks with quinoa and
dehydrated potatoes). Hotel staff can organize intriguing local excursions to
little-known points of interest.
You could theoretically camp along the way. Note that it’s illegal to camp
on the salt flat, and illegal to stay in the salt hotel on the way to Isla
Incahuasi.
Eating & Drinking
PIZZERIA
BOLIVIAN
INTERNATIONAL
INTERNATIONAL
For quick eats, cheap meals are on offer at the market comedor (dining hall)
and nearby street-food stalls. A fast-food kiosk next to the clock tower has a
few tables outside and cheap bites like sandwiches and hamburgers (B$8 to
B$35). Nearly every restaurant doubles as a pub.
 Minuteman Revolutionary Pizza $$
Offline map Google map
(Ferroviaria 60; pizzas B$30-40; breakfast & dinner) This convivial spot,
inside the Toñito Hotel, run by Chris from Boston and his Bolivian wife
Sussy, is a deserved travelers’ favorite with the best pizzas in town, tasty
alternatives like salads, pastas and sandwiches, and fantastic desserts. It’s
also a cozy spot for a beer or candlelit glass of Tarija wine, or a hearty
breakfast (B$20 to B$30) with all you can drink coffee or tea.
Lithium Club $$
Offline map Google map
(Potosí; mains B$45-70) This upper-end choice has horrible service and
great food. The international takes on traditional Bolivian dishes like
charque de llama (llama jerky) and pailita de llama (llama stew) bring
together authentic flavor combinations with a smidge of European styling.
The high-roofed colonial dining room is made only better by the ’80s rock
anthems that play in the background.
Restaurant 16 de Julio $$
Offline map Google map
(Arce; almuerzo B$18, mains B$18-45) Right along the main strip, this is a
pleasant and friendly place, with a full spectrum of international and
Bolivian dishes. Expect to wait a while to get served, especially at lunchtime
when locals flock here.
La Loco $$
Offline map Google map
(Potosí, btwn Sucre & Camacho; snacks B$9, mains B$25-30; 4pm-2am,
closed in low season) This friendly French-run restaurant and pub is in a
PUB
ITALIAN
PIZZERIA
PUB
barnlike space that’s lit low and furnished with comfortingly chunky wooden
furniture around a log fire. There are plenty of drinks and a short menu that
offers a variety of dishes from Mexico, France, Italy and even Bolivia.
Wiphala Pub $$
Offline map Google map
(Potosí 325; mains B$25-50) Named after the multicolored Aymará flag, this
place has a welcoming feel with its wooden tables, earthy vibe and board
games. It serves tasty Bolivian dishes, specializing in llama meat and quinoa,
and has quinoa beer.
Ristorante Italia $$
Offline map Google map
(Arce, btwn Potosí & Ferroviaria; mains B$18-25, pizza B$30-40) Service
can be painfully slow at this buzzing place with bamboo decor and plenty of
travelers. The menu features sandwiches and a wide selection of pizzas. You
can wash your meal down with a beer or cocktail.
Arco Iris $$
Offline map Google map
(Arce 27; pizzas B$30-35) Something of an Uyuni classic for pizza and
drinks, this place with wooden benches and Bolivian indigenous decor is
friendly and popular. It’s a great place to socialize and link up with other
travelers.
Extreme Fun Pub $$
Offline map Google map
(Potosí 9; mains B$35-45) This relaxed spot is a very enticing place for a tea
or coffee, a meal or sociable cocktail – try a Sexy Llama Bitch. It has salt
floors, friendly service, a book exchange and beautiful salar photos. It’s also
a good place to learn classic Bolivian dice games.
Information
Dangers & Annoyances
Watch your cash, especially around the train and bus stations. Readers have
reported groups of young men pretending to help buy tickets or transfer
luggage to a bus, and then taking off with backpacks. Carnaval is a godsend
for competent pickpockets, bag-slashers and con artists.
Emergency
Police station (cnr Ferroviaria & Bolívar) If you happen to get mugged,
head here to fill out a report.
Immigration
Migración Offline map Google map (Ferroviaria btwn Arce & Sucre;
8:30am-noon & 2:30-6pm Mon-Fri, 8:30am-noon Sat & Sun) For visa
needs. If traveling to Chile, you are better off getting your exit stamp at the
border.
Internet Access
There are several internet places in town but most have painfully slow
connections; an hour costs between B$4 and B$5.
Laundry
Most hotels offer some sort of laundry service, costing between B$8 and
B$20 per kilo. Lavarap Offline map Google map (cnr Ferroviaria & Sucre;
7am-10pm) charges B$15 per kilo.
Medical Services
Hospital ( 693-2025) Along Arce on the edge of town; does good work
and accepts most travel insurance.
Money
There are cash machines in town, but they don’t always work. Banco
Nacional de Bolivia and Banco Union both have ATMs. Prodem Offline map
Google map (Plaza Arce) and several similar places also change dollars and
give cash advances for 5%. Several places on Potosí between Arce and
Bolívar buy Chilean and Argentine pesos.
Tourist Information
Dirección de Turismo Offline map Google map
(direccionturismouyuni@hotmail.com; Potosí cnr Arce; 8:30am-noon &
2-6:30pm Mon-Fri) Inside the clock tower, this tourism office has sporadic
hours and, theoretically, distributes information about Uyuni and the rest of
Bolivia.
Office of Reserva Nacional de Fauna Andina Eduardo Avaroa Offline map
Google map (REA; www.boliviarea.com; Colón, at Avaroa; 8:30am12:30pm & 2:30-6:30pm Mon-Fri) Somewhat helpful administrative office
for the park of the same name. You can buy your park entry (B$150) here if
going under your own steam.
Getting There & Away
You can get to Uyuni by bus, plane or train. Buy your bus ticket the day
before and your train ticket as far in advance as you can.
Air
The easiest way to get to town is by flying direct from La Paz to Uyuni
International Airport (1km north of Uyuni). Amaszonas ( 222-0848;
www.amaszonas.com; Potosí s/n) has Uyuni–La Paz flights Monday,
Wednesday and Friday at 9am. La Paz–Uyuni flights leave Tuesday,
Thursday, Saturday and Sunday at 7am (and possibly 1:40pm). Schedules
change frequently. Tickets cost B$869 to B$975 one way.
Bus
All buses leave from the west end of Av Arce (where you’ll also find the
ticketing office), a couple of minutes’ walk from Plaza Arce. There’s a
choice of companies to most destinations, so ask around to get the best price,
time and service. Potosí buses leave at 9:30am and 6:30pm; Sucre buses
leave at 9:30am, noon and 7:30pm.
The safest and most comfortable terrestrial transport to La Paz is with
Todo Turismo ( 693-3337; www.todoturismo.bo; Cabrera 158, btwn
Bolívar & Arce; B$230 one-way), which runs a heated bus service with
friendly staff and an onboard meal, departing daily at 8pm. Other regular
destinations from Uyuni include the following:
Atocha, Tupiza and Villazón Buses leave at 6am and 8pm.
Calama, Chile Buses depart at 3:30am on Monday and Thursday and at
5am on Sunday and Wednesday (B$100, nine hours) in Chile. You will have
to change buses in Avaroa at the Chilean border; there are sometimes waits
of up to two hours.
Oruro and La Paz Buses generally leave around 7pm or 8pm.
BUS COSTS & DISTANCES
DESTINATION COST (B$) DURATION (HR)
Atocha 30 4
Cochabamba 72-155 12
La Paz 71-230 10-12
Oruro 43-117 7-8
Potosí 30 6
Sucre 60-70 9
Tupiza 50 7-8
Villazón 60 10
Car
An alternative route to Chile is with an organized tour, which will leave you
in San Pedro de Atacama. Some of the tour companies, including Cordillera
Tours ( Click here ), offer direct jeep transfers to San Pedro, which cost
around B$300 per person. The jeeps typically leave at 4pm, there’s a
sleepover in Villa Mar, and you arrive in San Pedro at noon the next day.
From San Pedro, buses to Salta, Argentina, depart three times weekly
(Tuesday, Friday and Saturday) at 10:30am. You can also get to Argentina
via Villazón.
Train
Uyuni has a modern, well-organized train station ( 693-2320;
www.fca.com.bo; Ferroviaria s/n). Trains take you north to Oruro, south to
Villazón and east to Calama, Chile. Seats often sell out so buy your ticket
several days in advance or get an agency to do it for you. There are
numerous reports of slow trains, cancelled trains and large gaps in service –
but that’s all part of the adventure.
Depending on size, you may have to check your backpack/case into the
luggage compartment. Look out for snatch thieves on the train just before it
pulls out.
Expreso del Sur is the slightly more luxurious line, departing Uyuni for
Oruro on Thursday and Sunday at 12:05am (1st/coach B$112/56); it departs
for Atocha, Tupiza and Villazón on Wednesday and Saturday at 12:45am.
Wara Wara offers a cheaper service and leaves Uyuni Tuesday and Friday
at 1:45am for Oruro (1st/coach/normal B$95/44/32); it heads south to
Atocha, Tupiza and Villazón on Thursday and Monday at 2:50am.
A train for Avaroa on the Chilean border departs on Monday at 3am
(B$32, five hours). From here you cross to Ollagüe and may have to wait a
few hours to clear Chilean customs. Another train then continues to Calama
(B$91 from Uyuni, six hours from Ollagüe). The whole trip can take up to
24 hours but it’s a spectacular, if uncomfortable, journey. Taking a bus to
Calama is more reliable.
BOLIVIA: SET TO BECOME THE SAUDI
ARABIA OF LITHIUM?
Bolivia holds the key to an environmentally sustainable future – 50% of the world’s lithium
deposits, a mineral essential for hybrid and electric vehicles, is found in the salt flats of Uyuni.
Several major players in the global auto industry have their eyes set on this untapped potential.
And while Bolivia’s previous governments would have happily sold off its lithium reserves to
foreign companies, it’s not going to happen under Evo Morales. Faithful to his anti-capitalist
rhetoric, he has continually rejected bids from international mining companies and, so far,
successfully warded off outside involvement in this precious mineral. With an investment of
US$6 million, Comibol, the state agency that oversees mining projects, is currently constructing a
pilot plant in the salt flats. The project has seen numerous setbacks, but continues slowly forward.
Car manufacturers predict that the world will need 500 kilotonnes per year to service a niche
market, with that figure to rise if electric cars become the norm. If the demand for eco-vehicles
does rise, the world’s existing supply of lithium will be outstripped by 2015. Critics claim that
Bolivia doesn’t have the technology to extract lithium quickly and efficiently enough, which may
thwart its plans to become the Saudi Arabia of lithium.
Salar de Uyuni
An evocative and eerie sight, the world’s largest salt flat (12,106 sq km) sits
at 3653m (11,984ft). When the surface is dry, the salar is a pure white
expanse of the greatest nothing imaginable – just blue sky, white ground and
you. When there’s a little water, the surface perfectly reflects the clouds and
the blue Altiplano sky, and the horizon disappears. If you’re driving across
the surface at such times, the effect is positively surreal, and it’s hard to
believe that you’re not actually flying through the clouds.
The Salar de Uyuni is now a center of salt extraction and processing,
particularly around the settlement of Colchani ( Click here ). The estimated
annual output of the Colchani operation is nearly 20,000 tons, 18,000 tons of
which is for human consumption while the rest is for livestock. And beneath
the surface, massive lithium deposits should fuel Bolivia’s economy (and
your iPod) for the next 100 years.
Formation
Between 40,000 and 25,000 years ago, Lago Minchín, whose highest level
reached 3760m, occupied much of southwestern Bolivia. When it
evaporated, the area lay dry for 14,000 years before the appearance of short-
lived Lago Tauca, which lasted for only about 1000 years and rose to
3720m. When it dried up, it left two large puddles, Lagos Poopó and Uru
Uru, and two major salt concentrations, the Salares de Uyuni and Coipasa.
This part of the Altiplano is drained internally, with no outlet to the sea;
the salt deposits are the result of the minerals leached from the mountains
and deposited at the lowest available point.
ISLA INCAHUASI
After stopping in the Cementerio de Trenes ( Click here ) and Colchani (
Click here ) salt extraction areas, you can visit a Salt Hotel (admission
B$25) where, although it is now closed to overnight visitors (see boxed text,
Click here ), you can still stop to check out the salt sculptures inside. From
here, your tour will continue on to the spectacular Isla Incahuasi, better
known as Isla del Pescado, in the heart of the salar 80km west of Colchani.
This hilly outpost is covered in Trichoreus cacti and surrounded by a flat
white sea of hexagonal salt tiles. It was once a remarkably lonely,
otherworldly place but since the advent of salar tours, it has become overrun
with tourists. All the tour groups arrive at the same time (noon) and swarm
over the hiking trails chasing the perfect photo of cacti and salt. It’s a 15-
minute walk to the top of the island, with a trail that loops back.
At the base of the island, the Museo Ritual has some interesting Spanishlanguage displays on Aymará rituals, beliefs and cultures.
Most groups have their lunch here. There’s also a cafe-restaurant
(nyc0079@hotmail.com; mains B$14-48, set lunch B$40; lunch Jul-Oct)
run by La Paz–based Mongo’s – reserve ahead. Altogether an industrialized
tourist experience, it’s still a beautiful sight if you forget the crowds.
VOLCÁN TUNUPA
A rounded promontory juts into the Salar de Uyuni diagonally opposite
Colchani, and on it rises Volcán Tunupa (5432m). Altitude aside, this
hulking yellow mountain is a relatively easy climb. One legend linking it to
the origins of the salt flat states that 16th-century Inca ruler Atahualpa
slashed the breast of a woman called Tunupa on the mountain’s slopes, and
the milk that spilled out formed the salar. Another story tells that back in
ancient days, mountains were men and women. Right after giving birth to
their baby, Tunupa learned her man was living with another woman.
Devastated, she wept and wept, spilling her salty tears over her breast milk,
and creating this vast area of sadness and beauty that is now the salar.
CLIMBING VOLCANOES
There are plenty of opportunities for getting out of the 4WD and doing something active
throughout the Southwest Circuit. One of the most popular activities is volcano climbing, with
guides easily available in the region’s settlements. The challenging aspect of most of the climbs is
the altitude rather than technical difficulty. Taking a guide is a good idea and contributes
something to the local communities, which are so often bypassed by the Uyuni-based tours.
The most frequently climbed is the Volcán Licancabur (5960m); it takes about eight hours to
climb to the summit, and two to get down. Several Uyuni and Tupiza agencies are happy to
include a guided climb of the volcano in a Southwest Circuit route, adding an extra day to the
trip. You can normally find a guide somewhere around Laguna Verde – they tend to charge about
B$300 for an ascent of the mountain, which has a beautiful lagoon at the top. The climb can be
done comfortably (if you handle the altitude) in one day. As the volcano is sacred to the locals,
the guides usually perform a ritual for Pachamama, asking the earth goddess her permission to
climb.
Nevado Candelaria (5995m), southwest of the Salar de Coipasa, is also an exhilarating climb.
The active Volcán Ollagüe (5865m) on the Chilean border southwest of San Pedro de Quemez is
another interesting option, with spectacular views – you can get pretty close to the summit with a
jeep and then hike the remaining 400m to the top. Another volcano to climb is the hulking
Tunupa (5400m), which you can approach from two sides – the village of Coquesa (10 hours
there and back, including a visit to the caves with pre-Incan mummies) or the village of Jirira
(four hours there and back).
It’s also possible to climb Uturuncu (6020m), which is an active volcano; jeeps can drive up
to just 1km below the summit and you can hike to the top – an easy way to say you’ve climbed a
6000m-high volcano!
COQUESA
On custom tours, you can stop at the village of Coquesa, taking time to
explore the several ruined ancient villages and burial grounds nearby.
Ceramic, gold and copper artifacts and articles of clothing have been
discovered at some of the sites, indicating the presence of an advanced but
little-known culture. Unfortunately, the sites’ remoteness has left them
vulnerable to amateur treasure hunters who have plundered several items of
archaeological value. Ask at the hotel for keys to the Museo Coquesa
(admission per 4WD B$20), which has a collection of ceramics and
mummies. You can also arrange a nighttime visit to the nearby observatory,
to really appreciate the starry skies.
The Maya Hostal de Sal (r per person B$35) in Coquesa is run by a local
Aymará family. The beds are built on salt blocks, the doors and windows of
cactus wood, and the dining room has salt tables with a splendid view over
the salar. At night, a camp fire and candlelight illuminate the place.
In the nearby village of Tahua, Hotel Tayka de Sal ( 7202-0069;
www.taykahoteles.com; s/d US$88/95) is built entirely of locally extracted
salt, apart from the thatched roof and the black-stone bathrooms. These
hotels come with heating. Reservations required.
CHUVICA
Many tours spend the first night in the handful of salt hotels around the
village of Chuvica that sits on the eastern edge of the salt flat. A signed trail
(1km) just south of the village takes you up the hillside to a small cavern
(make sure you get down before sunset). There’s a basic store here. The salt
hotels ( 7441-7357; r per person B$30) in town are nearly identical, with
salt floors, furniture and walls, and common dining rooms where you can eat
dinner (and shiver). The hotels have no heating, but an extra B$10 gets you a
hot shower.
At the southwestern tip of the salar, off the beaten track, is Hotel Takya
de Piedra (www.taykahoteles.com; s/d/tr US$88/95/115). Built of rugged
local stone, it lies near the village of San Pedro de Quemez, near the
burned-down ruins of a pre-Columbian settlement.
Los Lípez
Entering the remote and beautiful region of Los Lípez on the second day of
the standard Southwest Circuit, many tours pass through a military
checkpoint at the village of Colcha K (col -cha kah), where there’s a
pleasant adobe church and a series of fairly rudimentary dormitory
accommodations.
About 15km further along is the quinoa-growing village of San Juan
(elevation 3660m). It has a population of 1000, a lovely adobe church, and
several volcanic-rock tombs and burial chullpas (funerary towers) in its
vicinity. The community-run Museo Kausay Wasi (donation B$5) displays
regional archaeological finds.
At this point the route turns west and starts across the borax-producing
Salar de Chiguana, where the landscape opens up and snowcapped Ollagüe
(5865m), an active volcano straddling the Chilean border, appears in the
distance.
The route then turns south and climbs into high and increasingly wild
terrain, past several mineral-rich lakes filled with flamingos and backed by
hills. After approximately 170km of rough bumping through marvelous
landscapes, the road winds down to the much-photographed Árbol de
Piedra (Stone Tree) in the Desierto Siloli, 18km north of Laguna Colorada.
At the entrance to the lake, the Reserva Nacional de Fauna Andina
Eduardo Avaroa (REA; www.bolivia-rea.com; admission B$150) has a
station where you can pick up informative materials, pay your fee, and learn
more about local flora and fauna.
The next attraction, Laguna Colorada is a rusty-burnt-orange-hued lake
(4278m) that covers approximately 60 sq km and reaches a depth of just
80cm. The rich red coloration on the lake is derived from algae and plankton
that thrive in the mineral-rich water, and the shoreline is fringed with
brilliant white deposits of sodium, magnesium, borax and gypsum. The lake
sediments are also rich in diatoms (tiny microfossils used in the production
of fertilizer, paint, toothpaste and plastics, and as a filtering agent for oil,
pharmaceuticals, aviation fuel, beer and wine). More apparent are the
flamingos that breed here; all three South American species are present. The
clear air is bitterly cold and winter nighttime temperatures can drop below
-20°C.
Many tour groups end up spending the night not far from here in the
village of Huayajara, where basic hotels (sorry, no more salt ones) cost
about B$30 per night. This is the coldest night on the trip, as you’re sleeping
at around 4600m.
Hotel Tayka del Desierto ( 7202-0069; www.taykahoteles.com; s/d
US$100/110) is a sumptuous offering not far from Laguna de Colorado.
On day three of the standard tour, you wake at dawn to visit the large
geyser field dubbed Sol de Mañana. This 4850m-high geyser basin has
bubbling mud pots, hellish fumaroles and a thick and nauseating aroma of
sulfur fumes. Approach the site cautiously; any damp or cracked earth is
potentially dangerous and cave-ins do occur, sometimes causing serious
burns.
At the foot of Cerro Polques lies the Termas de Polques, a small 29.4°C
hot-spring pool, and an absolute paradise after the chilly salar nights.
Although they’re not boiling by any means, they’re suitable for bathing, and
the mineral-rich waters are thought to relieve the symptoms of arthritis and
rheumatism. There’s a restaurant here, and changing sheds with toilet
facilities.
The stunning blue-green Laguna Verde (4400m) is tucked into the
southwestern corner of Bolivian territory, 52km south of Sol de Mañana.
The incredible green color comes from high concentrations of lead, sulfur,
arsenic and calcium carbonates. In this exposed position, an icy wind blows
almost incessantly, whipping the water into a brilliant green-and-white froth.
This surface agitation, combined with the high mineral content, means that it
can remain liquid at temperatures as low as -21.2°C.
Behind the lake rises the cone of Volcán Licancabur (5960m), whose
summit is said to have once sheltered an ancient Inca crypt. Some tours
include an ascent of Licancabur, and although it presents no technical
difficulties, the wind, temperature, altitude and ball-bearing volcanic pumice
underfoot make it quite grueling.
Where the route splits about 20km south of Sol de Mañana, the more
scenic left fork climbs up and over a 5000m pass, then up a stark hillside
dotted with the enormous Rocas de Dalí, which appear to have been
meticulously placed by the surrealist master Salvador himself.
CROSSING THE BORDER TO CHILE
Most tour agencies now offer cross-border connections to San Pedro de Atacama by arrangement
with Chilean operators. You’ll make the connection not long after the Laguna Verde. Arrange this
ahead of time with your operator. It may be wise to stop by Migración ( Click here ) in Uyuni
before doing this. The Hito Cajón border post is much more reliable than it used to be. They
charge an exit tax of B$15 to B$30 here (B$21 is the standard), and supposedly operate 24 hours
a day. Try to be there before 6pm just to be on the safe side.
Around Salar de Uyuni
Some of the tour agencies are increasingly offering alternative tours of the
Southwest Circuit. These customized trips are usually pricier than typical
three-day jaunts but involve visits to some less-visited attractions in Los
Lípez and a real sense of discovery. This region is a land of bizarre lava
formations, active volcanoes, abandoned villages, badlands, salt flats, preIncan cave cemeteries, lone quinoa fields, flying condors, multicolored
lagoons and sulfur lakes. We’ve listed some of the places where you won’t
be surrounded by packs of jeeps and other travelers, where the feel of the
last frontier is true and real.
FROZEN FLAMINGOS
Three species of flamingo breed in the bleak high country of southwestern Bolivia, and once
you’ve seen these posers strutting through icy mineral lagoons at 5000m elevation, you’ll
abandon time-worn associations between flamingos, coconut palms and the steamy tropics. The
sight of these pinky-white birds with their black bills and tails adds yet another color to the
already spectacular palette hereabouts.
Flamingos have a complicated and sophisticated system for filtering the foodstuffs from highly
alkaline brackish lakes. They filter algae and diatoms from the water by sucking in and
vigorously expelling water from the bill several times per second. The minute particles are caught
on fine hairlike protrusions that line the inside of the mandibles. The suction is created by the
thick fleshy tongue, which rests in a groove in the lower mandible and pumps back and forth like
a piston.
The Chilean flamingo reaches heights of just over 1m and has a black-tipped white bill, dirty
blue legs, red knees and salmon-colored plumage. The James flamingo is the smallest of the three
species and has dark-red legs and a yellow-and-black bill. It’s locally known as jututu. The
Andean flamingo is the largest of the three and has pink plumage, yellow legs and a yellow-andblack bill.
Environmentalists have been particularly concerned for the birds in recent years, as tourism
has affected the flamingos’ breeding. Don’t try to creep up to them to get a better photo; above all
don’t put them to flight or encourage any guide that suggests doing this.
ISLA CÁSCARA DE HUEVO
The small ‘Eggshell Island’ was named for the broken shells of birds’ eggs
that litter it. It lies near the southern end of the Salar de Uyuni and is visited
mainly to see the strange patterns of salt crystallization in the area, some of
which resemble roses.
AQUAQUIZA
Some agencies now offer a side trip to Aquaquiza, a quinoa-producing
village in Nor Lípez where there’s alojamiento (basic accommodation;
B$20). The area’s attraction, Gruta de las Galaxias, lies 8km away.
Discovered in 2003, Gruta de las Galaxias is a small two-level grotto full of
beautiful petrified algae and corals from the ancient lake. Part of the same
complex is Cueva del Diablo, a cave sacred to the locals with a pre-Incan
cemetery scattered with small chullpas. Note the cross as you enter the cave,
marking where a shepherd girl was found mysteriously dead after seeking
protection from a storm inside the cave. There’s a viewpoint at the top to
admire the spectacularly desolate scenery and the petrified cacti.
Between March and December, a B$10 admission is charged for the
complex; otherwise it’s free but there’s nobody to show you around.
SALAR DE COIPASA
This great 2218-sq-km remote salt desert, northwest of the Salar de Uyuni at
an elevation of 3786m, was part of the same system of prehistoric lakes as
the Salar de Uyuni – a system that covered the area over 10,000 years ago.
The 4WD-only road to the Salar de Coipasa is extremely poor and the salt is
thin so it’s easy to get stuck, especially during the rainy season. If you go,
make sure the vehicle and the driver are reliable. The salt-mining village of
Coipasa, which (not surprisingly) is constructed mainly of salt, occupies an
island in the middle of the salar. You can also reach the Salar de Coipasa
from Oruro department.
LÍPEZ LAKES
The blue lake of Laguna Celeste or, more romantically, ‘heaven lake,’ is
still very much a peripheral trip for most Uyuni agencies, but it’s gaining
popularity with adventurous travelers as a one-day detour. A local legend
suggests the presence of a submerged ruin, possibly a chullpa, in the lake.
Behind the lake, a road winds its way up Volcán Uturuncu (6020m) to the
Uturuncu sulfur mine, in a 5900m pass between the mountain’s twin cones.
That means it’s more than 200m higher than the road over the Khardung La
in Ladakh, India, making it quite possibly the highest motorable pass in the
world.
In the vast eastern reaches of Sud Lípez are numerous other fascinating
mineral-rich lakes that are informally named for their odd coloration and
have so far escaped much attention. Various milky-looking lakes are known
as Laguna Blanca (White Lake), sulfur-colored lakes are Laguna Amarilla
(Yellow Lake) and wine-colored ones are known as Laguna Guinda
(Cherry Lake). Laguna Cañapa and Laguna Hedionda are also part of
some circuits. You can negotiate to add any of these to a tailored circuit.
QUETENA CHICO & AROUND
About 120km northeast of Laguna Verde and 30km southwest of Laguna
Celeste is the small mining settlement of Quetena Chico, which has a few
basic services and supplies, a military post and a couple of simple albergues
(hostels). It also has the Centro de Ecología Ch’aska, where you can see an
exhibition about the geology and biology of the Los Lípez region, and the
lives of the local llama herders.
Just 6km southeast from here is the picturesque abandoned village of
Barrancas, which nestles against a craggy cliff.
To the northeast, and well off the standard circuit (although visited by
some of the tours from Tupiza), the village of San Pablo de Lípez offers the
latest Tayka Hoteles ( Click here ) property, Hotel Tayka de Los Volcanes (
7202-0069; www.taykahoteles.com; s/d US$100/110), a high-end option
near the Argentinian border.
Heading back toward Uyuni, the village of Villa Mar has an interesting
mercado artesanal (craft market) that’s worth a visit. Stretch your legs by
strolling the 4km to some of the area’s most spectacular pinturas rupestres
(rock paintings), with impressive human figures wearing headdresses, and
incised animals. There are several simple albergues in Mallku, and also the
upmarket Mallku Cueva Lodge ( 622-9512; www.salardeuyuni.net; s/d
B$283/495) run by Hidalgo Tours ( Click here ).
VALLES DE ROCAS & SAN CRISTÓBAL
In the midst of high, lonesome country stretch several valleys of bizarre
eroded rock formations known as Valles de Rocas. These strangely shaped
badlands are perfect for a wander and snapping some great photos. From the
dusty village of Alota nearby, it’s a six-hour jostle back to Uyuni through a
string of ‘authentic villages,’ the most picturesque of which, Culpina K, has
colorful little houses and a cafe.
The mining village of San Cristóbal is worth a stop for the lovely 350-
year-old church. The entire village, including the church and the cemetery,
was moved from its original location next to the mine by the American–
Japanese mining project that took over the area digging for lead, zinc and
silver. The Hotel San Cristóbal (dm B$80, s B$140, d B$210-280) offers
electricity, sporadically hot solar-powered showers and a restaurant. There’s
a bus from Uyuni at 2pm; the return bus departs San Cristobal at 6am the
following day (B$15).
TUPIZA
POP 22,300 / ELEV 2950M (9678FT)
The pace of things in tranquil Tupiza seems a few beats slower than in other
Bolivian towns, making this a great place to relax for a few days, head out
for a rip-romping cowboy adventure like Butch Cassidy and Sundance did
100 years ago, or trundle off on the back road to the Salar de Uyuni.
Set in a spectacular ‘Wild West’ countryside, the capital of the southern
Chichas region is cornered in the Río Tupiza Valley, surrounded by rugged
scenery – cactus-studded slopes and eroded rainbow-colored rocks cut by
gravelly quebradas (ravines, usually dry).
The climate is mild year-round, with most of the rain falling between
November and March. From June to August, days are hot, dry and clear, but
at nighttime the temperatures can drop to below freezing.
Economically, the town depends on agriculture and mining. A refinery
south of town provides employment, and the country’s only antimony (a
flame-retardant metallic element) smelter operates sporadically.
Tupiza
C3
B2
C3
(see 6)
(see 7)
(see 5)
D4
D3
C4
C3
C2
C3
B3
B3
B3
C4
D5
A3
(see 15)
B3
B3
 Sights
1 Mercado de Ferias
2 Mercado Negro
 Activities, Courses & Tours
3 Hotel Mitru Pool
La Torre Tours
Tupiza Tours
Valle Hermoso Tours
 Sleeping
4 Annex Valle Hermoso
5 Hostal Valle Hermoso
6 Hotel La Torre
7 Hotel Mitru
8 Hotel Mitru Anexo
9 Tupiza Hostal
 Eating
10 Alamo
11 Il Bambino
12 Italiana
13 Milan Center
14 Rinconcito Quilmes
15 Tú Pizza
 Information
Banco Union
16 Latin America Cambio
17 Prodem
History
The tribe that originally inhabited the region called themselves Chichas and
left some archaeological evidence of their existence. Despite this, little is
known about their culture or language, and it’s assumed these were distinct
from those of the tribes in neighboring areas of southern Bolivia and
northern Argentina.
Officially, Tupiza was founded on June 4, 1574, by Captain Luis de
Fuentes (who was also the founder of Tarija). From Tupiza’s inception
through the War of Independence, its Spanish population grew steadily, lured
by the favorable climate and suitable agricultural lands. Later, the discovery
of minerals attracted even more settlers. More recently, campesinos
(subsistence farmers) have drifted in from the countryside and many
unemployed miners have settled here.
CHIPAYA
Immediately north of the Salar de Coipasa, on the Río Sabaya delta, live the Chipaya people.
They occupy two main desert villages (Santa Ana de Chipaya and Ayparavi) of unique circular
mud huts known as khuyas or putucus, which have doors made from cactus wood and always
face east. Chipayas are best recognized by their earth-colored clothing and the women’s unique
hairstyle, which is plaited into 60 small braids. These are, in turn, joined into two large braids and
decorated with a laurake (barrette) at each temple.
Some researchers believe the Chipaya were the Altiplano’s first inhabitants, and that they may
in fact be a remnant of the lost Tiwanaku civilization. Much of this speculation is based on the
fact that their language is vastly different from both Quechua and Aymará, and is probably a
surviving form of Uru.
Chipaya tradition maintains that their people came into the world when it was still dark, and
that they are descended from the ‘Men of Water’ – perhaps the Uru. Their religion, which is
nature-based, is complex and symbolic, deifying phallic images, stones, rivers, mountains, animal
carcasses and ancestors. The village church tower is worshipped as a demon – one of 40 named
demons who represent hate, ire, vengeance, gluttony and other evils. These are believed to
inhabit the whitewashed mud cones that exist within a 15km radius of the village, where they’re
appeased with libations, sacrifices and rituals to prevent their evil from invading the village.
The reverent commemoration of dead ancestors culminates on November 2, Día de los
Muertos (Day of the Dead), when bodies are disinterred from chullpas (funerary towers).
They’re feted with a feast, copious drink and coca leaves, and informed about recent village
events and the needs of the living. Those who were chiefs, healers and other luminaries are
carried to the church where they’re honored with animal sacrifices.
The Río Lauca, on which the Chipaya have depended for thousands of years, is not only
heavily polluted but has also been drying out due to global warming. A lot of the Chipaya have
emigrated to Chile and the ones left in the community are facing extinction. In the main
settlement, Santa Ana de Chipaya, the traditional way of life is slowly vanishing. It’s rare to see
the circular houses, also known as huayllichas, and the original dress unless you go to Ayparavi
or the rural areas.
Visiting the Chipaya
In general, tourists aren’t especially welcome, and are expected to pay a fee for entering the
Chipaya ‘nation’ (visitors have been charged anything from US$50 to US$100 per person; you’ll
MARKET
MARKET
MARKET
pay a lot less if you don’t turn up in a 4WD). The Chipayas don’t like to be photographed but
some will do so for a fee (expect to be charged between B$20 and B$100 per photo). There’s
simple alojamiento (basic accommodations) in Chipaya village and a small shop.
From Oruro, buses leave daily for Huachacalla; there you’ll have to arrange onward
transportation to Chipaya, 30km beyond. From Sabaya, it takes about an hour to get there. Ask
for Jaime Soruco, who is the owner of the restaurant and hotel in the village, and who will be
willing to help visitors. It costs about B$400 to get there and back, with a wait of two to three
hours. Alternatively, you can reach Sabaya or Huachacalla on any bus between Oruro and
Iquique along a bumpy road.
In addition, a few tour companies organize visits to the village; check with Charlie Tours (
Click here ) in Oruro. Note that visiting the Chipaya in the rainy season is practically impossible,
as the roads get washed away.
Sights & Activities
Tupiza’s main attraction is the surrounding countryside, best seen on foot or
horseback. The short hike up Cerro Corazón de Jesús, flanked by the
Stations of the Cross, is a pleasant morning or evening outing when the low
sun brings out the fiery reds of the surrounding countryside.
Mercado Negro
Offline map Google map
(Junín, btwn Av Santa Cruz & Chichas) The ironically permanent mercado
negro (black market) has a mishmash of consumer goods, and occupies an
entire block between Av Santa Cruz and Chichas.
Street Markets
Lively street markets convene Thursday and Saturday mornings near the
train station. A kilometer south of town, the Mercado Campesino features
more of the same on Monday, Thursday and Saturday.
Mercado de Ferias
Offline map Google map
The central Mercado de Ferias has lots of produce stalls and comedores
upstairs.
Hotel Mitru Pool SWIMMING
Offline map Google map
(Chichas 187; per half-day B$20) Nonguests can enjoy Hotel Mitru’s solarheated swimming pool. In the high season it has a snack bar with drinks,
sandwiches and pizzas.
Tours
There’s an ever-increasing number of operators in Tupiza offering trips
through the Southwest Circuit ending in Uyuni or back in Tupiza (or, in
some cases, San Pedro de Atacama in Chile). Tupiza is a great place to do
this trip from, as you get to explore the lesser-known wild lands of Sud
Lípez as well as seeing the well-established highlights at different times to
the large convoys of 4WDs that visit them out of Uyuni.
The downside is that you may have to wait a while in Tupiza to get a
group together (although the larger outfits have departures almost daily).
Expect to pay between B$1200 and B$1350 per person for the standard fourday trip, based on four people in a jeep during the high season. This price
typically includes all meals, transport and basic accommodations, but does
not include the B$150 entrance to the Reserva Nacional de Fauna Andina
Eduardo Avaroa ( Click here ), snacks, sleeping-bag rental (yes, do it!) or
bottled water. Customized trips, many including climbing options, will cost a
bit more but they’re worth the surcharge.
While most tour operators display enthusiastic comments from satisfied
customers, the truth is that standards vary widely. Many people end up
choosing the agency based on their accommodations’ choice, but it’s well
worth getting out there and chatting to a few different operators.
Professionalism, honesty and flexibility are the things to look for, rather than
willingness to haggle on the price. The same safety precautions apply as in
Uyuni when looking for the right tour operator for you.
All agencies offer horseback riding (per 3/5/7 hr B$105/175/245, per 2/4
days B$380-480). Longer rides include a sleepover in basic accommodations
in the villages of Espicaya or Quiriza. Also on offer by all the agencies is the
triathlon (per person incl lunch B$200-300, based on 4 people), an active
full-day tour of the surrounding area by jeep, horseback and mountain bike.
You can also arrange a jeep tour (per day B$450-600) or a guided trek (per
GUIDED TOUR
GUIDED TOUR
GUIDED TOUR
half-day B$100-150). Note that in low season, you’ll often find the rates
negotiable but don’t haggle too much, as the quality is also likely to go
down.
These tours and activities are offered by the following agencies:
La Torre Tours
Offline map Google map
( 694-2633; www.latorretours-tupiza.com; Chichas 220, Hotel La Torre)
Run by a friendly couple, this agency offers personalized tours of Tupiza’s
surroundings and into the salar. During the dry season it rents bikes for
B$70 per day.
Tupiza Tours
Offline map Google map
( 694-3003; www.tupizatours.com; Chichas 187, Hotel Mitru) This outfit
pioneered many of the Tupiza-area routes now also offered by competitors.
While the agency is well run and has daily departures to the salar, there have
been mixed reports about the quality of its tours that apparently lack a
personal touch (it uses 12-person minivans). Their two-day Butch and
Sundance tour (B$600, based on 4 people) is popular, and it includes an
overnight stay in the hamlet of Tatasi as well as a visit to the abandoned
mining village of Portugalete.
Valle Hermoso Tours
Offline map Google map
( 694-4344; www.vallehermosatours.com; Arraya 478, Hostal Valle
Hermoso) The agency inside Hostal Valle Hermoso gets mixed reviews and
the owners tend to be pushy.
THE LAST DAYS OF BUTCH CASSIDY &
THE SUNDANCE KID
Butch and Sundance (real names Robert LeRoy Parker and Harry Alonzo Longabaugh) came to
southern Bolivia in August 1908 and took up residence with the Briton AG Francis, who was
transporting a gold dredge on the Río San Juan del Oro. While casing banks to finance their
retirement, the outlaws learned of an even sweeter target: a poorly guarded US$480,000 minecompany payroll to be hauled by mule from Tupiza to Quechisla.
On November 3, 1908, manager Carlos Peró picked up a packet of cash from Aramayo,
Francke & Compañía in Tupiza and headed north with his 10-year-old son and a servant, but they
were discreetly tailed by Butch and Sundance. Peró’s party stayed overnight in Salo, then set off
again at dawn. As the trio ascended the hill called Huaca Huañusca, the bandits watched from
above with binoculars. In a rugged spot on the far side of the hill, they relieved Peró of a
handsome mule and the remittance, which turned out to be a mere US$90,000 – the prized
payroll had been slated for shipment the following week.
Dispirited, Butch and Sundance returned to Francis’ headquarters at Tomahuaico. The
following day, Francis guided them to Estarca, where they spent the night. On the morning of
November 6, the bandits bade farewell to Francis and headed west to San Vicente.
Meanwhile, Peró had sounded the alarm, and posses were scouring southern Bolivia. A fourman contingent from Uyuni reached San Vicente that afternoon. Butch and Sundance arrived at
dusk, rented a room from Bonifacio Casasola and sent him to fetch supper. The posse came to
investigate and had scarcely entered the courtyard when Butch shot and killed a soldier. During
the brief gunfight that ensued, Sundance was badly wounded. Realizing that escape was
impossible, Butch ended Sundance’s misery with a shot between the eyes, then fired a bullet into
his own temple.
At the inquest, Carlos Peró identified the corpses as those of the men who had robbed him.
Although buried as desconocidos (unknowns) in the cemetery, the outlaws fit descriptions of
Butch and Sundance, and a mountain of circumstantial evidence points to their having met their
doom in San Vicente. For example, Santiago Lowe, Butch’s well-known alias, was recently found
among the hotel guest list published in the Tupiza newspaper just a few days before the Aramayo
holdup, which confirms eyewitness accounts that he was there. Nonetheless, rumors of their
return to the USA have made their fate one of the great mysteries of the American West.
In 1991 a team led by forensic anthropologist Clyde Snow attempted to settle the question by
excavating the bandits’ grave. No one in the village had any knowledge of its location, except
one elderly – and as it turned out, imaginative – gentleman, who led them to a specific
tombstone. The grave’s sole occupant turned out to be a German miner named Gustav Zimmer.
Anne Meadows (the author of Digging Up Butch and Sundance, University of Nebraska Press,
2003) & Daniel Buck
Sleeping
You’ll often be quoted cheaper rates for rooms in the hope that you’ll then
take a tour with the hotel’s agency. The cheapest options are several basic
residenciales (simple accommodations) opposite the train station.
HOTEL
HOTEL
HOTEL
HOSTEL
Hotel Mitru $
Offline map Google map
( 694-3001; www.hotelmitru.com; Chichas 187; r per person without
bathroom B$60, s with bathroom B$180-220, d with bathroom B$200-300;
) The best and most reliable hotel in town, the busy Mitru has been run
by the same family for generations and is a relaxing choice built around a
swimming pool that’s just the ticket after a dusty day out on horseback. It
has a variety of rooms in two sections: the older ‘garden’ part and the newer
‘cactus’ area. The suites with a fridge and minibar are particularly appealing,
and the rooms with shared bathrooms are top value in the budget range.
Hotel La Torre $
Offline map Google map
( 694-2633; www.latorretours-tupiza.com; Chichas 220; s/d incl breakfast
B$70/140, r per person without bathroom B$50) This sound, central choice
run by a retired nurse and doctor offers clean rooms with good beds and
clean bathrooms. Rooms at the front of the rambling colonial-era home are
much lighter but chillier, and the beds can be a bit lumpy. Guests have use of
a kitchen, roof terrace and TV lounge – a good place to meet other travelers.
Hotel Mitru Anexo $
Offline map Google map
( 694-3002; www.hotelmitru.com; Avaroa at Serrano; r with/without
bathroom B$160/100; ) A marginally cheaper offshoot of Hotel Mitru with
a similar vibe but no pool (you can use the Mitru’s for free), this place offers
good value. The solid rooms sport cable TVs, phones and hot water. The
bathrooms are modern, and guests have use of a kitchen and terraces.
Hostal Valle Hermoso $
Offline map Google map
( 694-4344; www.vallehermosotours.com; Arraya 478; s/d B$60/120, dm/r
per person without bathroom B$40/40; ) Set in two separate buildings a
block apart, this is an old-school hostel with a book exchange, roof terrace
and plenty of social space. It’s HI-affiliated (members get a 10% discount),
HOTEL
PIZZERIA
BOLIVIAN
PIZZERIA
clean and convenient. Annex Valle Hermoso Offline map Google map (Arraya
505) is nearer the bus station and more up-to-date, with rooms featuring
more space, light and cable TVs.
Tupiza Hostal $
Offline map Google map
( 694-5240; Florida 10; r per person without bathroom B$30) Budget
seekers should check out this hostel. The rooms are a bit dark and the beds
are pretty poor quality, but the sheets are clean and the courtyard is a great
spot to hang out with fellow travelers. It offers use of a communal shower
and a shared kitchen.
Eating
The upstairs section of the central market is the best place to fill up at lunch,
for between B$10 and B$15. For a real morning treat, head for Mercado
Negro after 8am for charque -filled tamales (cornmeal dough filled with
jerky; B$1.50).
Milan Center $$
Offline map Google map
(cnr Chichas & Chuquisaca; mains B$30-50, pizza B$27-30; 8am-10pm)
For the best pizza in town, head over to Milan Center, which serves up
crispy thin-crust pizzas and an amazing variety of topping options. The
covered back patio is a wonderful break from the streets of Tupiza, and the
service very friendly.
Il Bambino $
Offline map Google map
(Florida & Santa Cruz; almuerzo B$12) This friendly corner eatery offers
excellent salteñas (B$3) in the morning and is a popular spot with locals.
The almuerzo (set lunch) is thought to be one of the best in town, and is an
excellent value in terms of kilo-per-Boliviano.
Tú Pizza $
MEXICAN
INTERNATIONAL
ARGENTINIAN
Offline map Google map
(Plaza Independencia s/n; mains B$16-30) This stylish little eatery on the
main plaza has a rustic feel, high ceilings, nice artwork and good service.
The food runs the usual gamut of pizzas, pastas and lasagna as well as mains
with local goat cheese and quinoa. Try the sweet pizza with chocolate and
dulce de leche (super-sweet caramelized milk).
Alamo $
Offline map Google map
(Avaroa & Santa Cruz; snacks B$4-9, mains B$9-15) A green light outside
marks this popular saloon-style spot where locals and tourists mingle in the
funky two-story space with a Mexican vibe and lots of knickknacks. The
menu features mainly meat dishes, like pique macho (beef chunks and
sausages over french fries with lettuce, tomatoes, onions and spicy locoto
peppers), and comes in huge tasty portions.
Italiana $$
Offline map Google map
(Florida near Plaza Independencia; mains B$18-35) Despite its name,
Italiana also serves a variety of international dishes from China, the US and,
yes, Italy. It’s one of the better tourist-oriented restaurants in town and a
good spot for a cocktail, glass of wine or beer.
Rinconcito Quilmes $$
Offline map Google map
(Suipacha 14; almuerzo B$10, mains B$25-35) You’ll see few other tourists
in this little spot known for cheap, filling lunches served in a spacious dining
room and a couple of outside tables. It’s popular on weekends for its asados
(barbecues) with quality meat from Argentina.
Information
Internet Access & Telephone
There are several internet places on the plaza that charge B$3 per hour, as
does Entel (cnr Avaroa & Santa Cruz), where you can also make calls.
Laundry
All accommodations can do a load of washing for you. There’s a laundry (
Mon-Sat) on Florida that charges B$10 per kilo.
Maps
Most agencies distribute small maps of the town and the surroundings.
Money
Banco Union Offline map Google map (cnr 7 de Noviembre & Sucre) has an
ATM that accepts international cards. Try Prodem for cash advances. Latin
America Cambio Offline map Google map (Avaroa 160) accepts several
currencies but not at the best rates.
Tourist Information
With no official tourist office, the hotels and agencies are your main source
of information.
Getting There & Away
Bus
The bus station (Pedro Arraya) has buses to most major destinations or
hubs in the region. There are multiple trips per day down to Villazón. Buses
to other destinations tend to leave either in the morning or evening.
Schedules change often so check ahead.
BUS COSTS & DISTANCES
DESTINATION COST (B$) DURATION (HR)
Cochabamba 80 16-18
La Paz 70 13-15
Oruro 60 11
Potosí 50 6
Tarija 50 6-8
Villazón 15-22 3
Train
Unfortunately, if you travel by train you miss most of the brilliant scenery on
the route to Uyuni, so you might consider the less comfortable bus service.
The ticket window at the train station ( 694-2527) opens irregularly on
days when there’s a train, so it can be easier to have an agency buy your
tickets for a small surcharge.
EXPRESO DEL SUR – VILLAZÓN TO ORURO WEDNESDAYS & SATURDAYS
RUN COST (B$ 1ST/COACH) SCHEDULE
Villazón–Tupiza 37/18 3:30-6:15pm
Tupiza–Atocha 56/24 6:25-9:30pm
Atocha–Uyuni 93/42 9:45-11:50pm
Uyuni–Oruro 224/101 12:05-7am
WARA WARA – VILLAZÓN TO ORURO MONDAYS & THURSDAYS
RUN COST (B$ 1ST/COACH/NORMAL) SCHEDULE
Villazón–Tupiza 35/19/11 3:30-6:15pm
Tupiza–Atocha 44/18/15 7:05-10:45pm
Atocha–Uyuni 75/31/24 9:45-11:50pm
Uyuni–Oruro 170/75/56 1:45-9:10am
* Prices one-way from Tupiza.
Around Tupiza
Much of Tupiza’s appeal lies in the surrounding landscape, a visually
stunning wilderness of quebradas (ravines), thirsty riverbeds and thriving
cacti that’ll have you whistling a Western theme tune in no time. It’s great
CANYON
LOOKOUT
hiking country and also perfect for exploration on horseback or 4WD –
several Tupiza operators offer these excursions.
If you’re hiking without a guide, it’s not easy to get lost, but take a map
anyway – you can get them from various tour agencies. Carry at least 3L of
water per day in this dry desert climate. It’s wise to wear shoes that can
withstand assault by prickly desert vegetation, and to carry a compass or
GPS if you’re venturing away from the tracks. Flash flooding is also a
danger, particularly in the summer months; avoid camping in the quebradas
or entering the canyons, especially if it looks like rain.
El Cañón del Duende
This canyon can be reached from Tupiza on a great half-day stroll; ask any
of the agencies for a map and directions. You can also enter the canyon on
foot for a scenic 20-minute hike through its towering red rock formations. El
Cañón del Inca is also part of most itineraries.
El Angosto
This scenic spot near Tupiza is a spectacular tunnel of a road carved into the
mountain – great for photographs.
QUEBRADA DE PALALA
Just northwest of Tupiza is Quebrada de Palala, a broad wash lined with
some very impressive red formations known as fins. During the rainy season
it becomes a tributary of the Río Tupiza, but in the winter months it serves as
a highway into the back country and part of the salt route from the Salar de
Uyuni to Tarija. Beyond the dramatic red rocks, the wash rises very gently
into hills colored greenish-blue and violet by lead and other mineral
deposits.
To get here, head north on Tupiza’s Av La Paz from Plazuela El Mundo
past the giant slide; 2km ahead, along the railroad line, you’ll see the mouth
of the quebrada. About 5km further along, the route passes some obvious fin
formations and continues up the broad quebrada into increasingly lonely
country, past scrub brush and cacti stands.
EL SILLAR
El Sillar (The Saddle), 15km from Tupiza, is where a road straddles a narrow
ridge between two peaks and two valleys. Throughout this area, rugged
amphitheaters have been gouged out of the mountainsides and eroded into
spires that resemble a stone forest. The road continues on to San Vicente, of
Butch and Sundance fame. This entire route is part of a centuries-old trade
route. From May to early July you may see a trickle of llama, alpaca and
donkey trains – or nowadays more likely camiones (pickup trucks) –
humping salt blocks 300km from the Salar de Uyuni to trade in Tarija.
QUEBRADA PALMIRA
Between Tupiza and Quebrada Seca lies Quebrada Palmira, a wonderful,
normally dry wash flanked by tall and precarious fin formations. The right
fork of the wash is rather comically known as Valle de los Machos (Valley of
Males) or Valle de los Penes (Valley of Penises). The names stem from the
clusters of exceptionally phallic pedestal formations.
CROSSING THE BORDER TO ARGENTINA
The Bolivian side of the main border crossing to Argentina in the town of Villazón is a
sprawling, dusty, chaotic sort of place. The frontier and bus station are always busy as numerous
Bolivians work in Argentina. Watch out for the usual scammers who tend to congregate at
borders; dodgy banknotes and petty theft are not unknown.
The Argentine consulate Offline map Google map ( 597-2011; Plaza 6 de Agosto 123;
10am-1pm Mon-Fri) is on the main square. Numerous casas de cambio (money changers)
near the bridge along Av República Argentina offer reasonable rates of exchange for US dollars
and Argentine pesos, less for bolivianos. Banco Mercantil (JM Deheza 423) changes cash and
has an ATM dispensing US dollars and bolivianos.
All northbound buses depart from the Villazón bus terminal (fee B$2). All except those bound
for Tarija pass through Tupiza (B$15 to B$22, 2½ hours); it’s a beautiful trip, so try to go in the
daylight and grab a window seat – at night the speed, turns and bumps can make it a very scary
ride. Regular bus services also head to La Paz (B$140 to B$170, 21 hours) via Potosí (B$80 to
B$120, 11 hours) and Oruro (B$140 to B$160, 17 hours). Daily evening buses along the rough
but amazing route to Tarija (B$40, seven to eight hours) continue to Bermejo (there are four
onward departures per day).
Argentine bus companies have ticket offices opposite Villazón’s terminal, but all Argentine
buses leave from the La Quiaca bus terminal, across the border. You’ll be hassled by ticket sellers
for both Argentine and Bolivian bus services; don’t be rushed into buying a ticket, as there may
be a service leaving sooner. You can easily bargain down the price on longer routes; conversely,
the sellers may try and overcharge you on shorter journeys.
The Villazón train station is 1.5km north of the border crossing – a taxi costs B$5.
To just visit La Quiaca briefly there’s no need to visit immigration; just walk straight across the
bridge. Crossing the border is usually no problem, but avoid the line of traders getting their goods
searched or it may take you hours to clear customs.
On the north side of the international bridge, Bolivian customs & immigration ( 24hr)
issues exit and entry stamps (the latter normally only for 30 days). There is no official charge for
these services, but a B$21 to B$50 ‘service fee’ is sometimes leveraged. Argentine immigration
and Argentine customs are open from 7am to 11pm. Formalities are minimal but the wait and
exhaustive custom searches can be very long. In addition, those entering Argentina may be held
up at several control points further south of the border by more customs searches.
HUACA HUAÑUSCA & SAN VICENTE
On November 4, 1908, Robert LeRoy Parker (Butch Cassidy) and Harry
Alonzo Longabaugh (the Sundance Kid) pulled off the last robbery of their
careers when they politely and peacefully relieved Carlos Peró of the
Aramayo company payroll, which amounted to US$90,000, at the foot of a
hill called Huaca Huañusca (Dead Cow). The name was apparently applied
because of the hill’s resemblance to a fallen bovine. From an obvious pass
on the ridge, a walking track descends the steep slopes to the west for about
2km to the river, where there’s a small meadow, a tiny cave and some rugged
rocky outcrops where the bandits probably holed up while waiting for the
payroll to pass. Several Tupiza agencies offer jeep trips to Huaca Huañusca.
San Vicente is a remote one-mule village that wouldn’t even rate a
mention were it not the legendary spot where the outlaws met their untimely
demise. The mine in San Vicente is now closed and the place has declined to
little more than a ghost town. Most of those remaining are military people,
mine security guards and their families. To be honest, even hardcore Butch
and Sundance fans are sometimes a little disappointed by the place, a dusty
spot with a tiny museum (admission B$20) and little tourist infrastructure.
The museum is often closed and the key-holder difficult to track down.
Bring your imagination: you can still see the adobe house where the bandits
holed up and eventually died, and the cemetery where they were buried.
There’s no regular public transportation between Tupiza and San Vicente;
occasionally, a camión (flatbed truck) departs for San Vicente early on
Thursday morning from Tupiza’s Plazuela El Mundo ( Click here ). The
easiest way to go is with an agency from Tupiza. While the one-day trips to
San Vicente and back are a long, expensive slog, some of the agencies offer
a more interesting two-day excursion, taking in Huaca Huañusca en route.
Top of section
     Includes »
     Cochabamba
     Parque Nacional Tunari
     Cerro Tunari Area
     Tiquipaya
     Inca-Rakay & Sipe Sipe
     Tarata & Huayculli
     Incallajta
     Totora
     Mizque
     Parque Nacional Torotoro
     Sucre
     Tarabuco
     Cordillera de los Frailes
     Potosí
Central Highlands
Why Go?
The Central Highlands are located at the heart of the country and for many
represent the heart of the nation. Gorgeous whitewashed Sucre, with elegant
patioed houses and noble churches, is where independence was declared in
1825. Potosí, on the other hand, is a powerful symbol of the natural wealth
of the country, built on the silver deposits extracted from nearby Cerro Rico.
At a much lower altitude, Cochabamba is one of Bolivia’s most pleasant
cities, with a perfect climate and modern vibe.
But it’s not all about cities here. Throughout the region there are lovely,
little-known colonial towns gently crumbling with age. It’s well worth
eschewing the city-to-city mode of travel to explore them. A more distant
past is evoked by the Inca ruins in the Cochabamba valley, but Parque
Nacional Torotoro has the last laugh on the age front; it’s bristling with
dinosaur footprints and fossils, some of which date back 300 million years.
When to Go
Mar Indigenous festival Pujllay bursts into life on the third Sunday in
March.
Aug Catch merrymaking at the Fiesta de la Virgen de Urkupiña.
Oct–Mar Target the summer months to avoid the worst of Potosí’s chills.
Best Places to Eat
»El Huerto ( Click here )
»Malpartida ( Click here )
»Tentaciones ( Click here )
»Kabbab ( Click here )
»Tunari ( Click here )
Best Places to Stay
»Casa Verde ( Click here )
»Samary Boutique Hotel ( Click here )
»Hacienda Cayara ( Click here )
»Villa Etelvina ( Click here )
»Hotel Aranjuez ( Click here )
Central Highlands Highlights
 Admire the churches of Potosí ( Click here ), filled with
evocative religious artworks
 Goggle at the colonial beauty of Sucre ( Click here ), Bolivia’s
most attractive city
 Pack on the pounds or party hard in Cochabamba ( Click here ),
which boasts some of the country’s best restaurants and bars
 Home in on remote and wild Parque Nacional Torotoro ( Click
here ), stomping ground of dinosaurs
 Roam the Cordillera de los Frailes ( Click here ), with its
intriguing Jal’qa weaving culture
 Take in one of the whacky festivals at little Tiquipaya ( Click
here )
 Visit Bolivia’s version of Machu Picchu, the mystical ruins of
Incallajta ( Click here )
History
Prior to Spanish domination, the town of Charcas (nowadays Sucre) was the
indi- genous capital of the valley of Choque-Chaca. As the residence of local
religious, military and political leaders, its jurisdiction extended to several
thousand inhabitants. When the Spanish arrived, the area from southern Peru
to the Río de la Plata in present-day Argentina came to be known as
Charcas.
In the early 1530s Francisco Pizarro, the conquistador who felled the Inca
empire, sent his brother Gonzalo to the Charcas region to oversee indigenous
mining activities that might prove to be valuable to the Spanish realm. He
was not interested in the Altiplano and concentrated on the highlands east of
the main Andean cordilleras. As a direct result, in 1538 a new Spanish
capital of the Charcas was founded. Following in the conquered population’s
footsteps, he chose the warm, fertile valley of Choque-Chaca for its site. The
city, later to become Sucre, was named La Plata – silver was god in those
days.
Whereas previously all territories in the region had been governed from
Lima, in 1559 King Felipe II created the Audiencia (Royal Court) of
Charcas, with its headquarters in the young city, to help administer the
eastern territories. Governmental subdivisions within the district came under
the jurisdiction of royal officers known as corregidores.
In 1776 a new Viceroyalty was established in what is now Buenos Aires
and the Charcas came under its control. The city became known as
Chuquisaca (a Spanish corruption of Choque-Chaca), as there were too
many La Platas around for comfort.
The city had received an Archbishopric in 1609, according it theological
autonomy. That, along with the establishment of the University of San
Xavier in 1622 and the 1681 opening of the Academía Carolina law school,
fostered continued development of liberal and revolutionary ideas and set the
stage for ‘the first cry of Independence in the Americas’ on May 25, 1809.
The minirevolution set off the alarm throughout Spanish America and, like
ninepins, the northwestern South American republics were liberated by the
armies of the military genius Simón Bolívar.
After the definitive liberation of Peru at the battles of Junín and Ayacucho,
on August 6 and December 9, 1824, Alto Peru (historically tied to the Lima
government) was technically free of Spanish rule. In practice, however, it
had been administered from Buenos Aires and disputes arose about what to
do with the territory.
On February 9, 1825, Bolívar’s second-in-command, General Antonio
José de Sucre, drafted and delivered a declaration that rejected the authority
of Buenos Aires and suggested the political future of the region should be
determined by the provinces themselves.
Bolívar, unhappy with this unauthorized act of sovereignty, rejected the
idea but de Sucre stood his ground, convinced that there was sufficient
separatist sentiment in Alto Peru to back him up. As he expected, the people
of the region staunchly refused to wait for a decision from the new congress,
which was to be installed in Lima the following year, and also rejected
subsequent invitations to join the Buenos Aires government.
On August 6, the first anniversary of the Battle of Junín, independence
was declared in the Casa de la Libertad at Chuquisaca and the new republic
was christened Bolivia, after its liberator. On August 11 the city’s name was
changed for the final time to Sucre, in honor of the general who’d promoted
the independence movement.
National Parks
The region’s protected areas include the remote Parque Nacional Torotoro (
Click here ), peppered with thousands of dinosaur footprints, and Parque
Nacional Tunari ( Click here ), easily accessible from the city of
Cochabamba.
 Getting There & Away
The Central Highlands’ major population centers are well served by intercity
buses; timetables for the major cities can be consulted online at
www.boliviaentusmanos.com/terminal. Getting between towns in the region
is a bit more of a challenge if venturing beyond the Potosí–Sucre paved
highway; the route between Cochabamba and Sucre is a particularly slow
one.
Cochabamba has the busiest airport, but for Potosí you should fly into
Sucre as it’s only about 162km away.
COCHABAMBA
 4 / POP 517,000 / ELEV 2553M
Busy, buzzy Cochabamba is one of Bolivia’s boom cities and has a distinct,
almost Mediterranean, vitality that perhaps owes something to its clement
climate. While much of the city’s population is typically poor, parts of town
have a notably prosperous feel. The spacious new-town avenues have a wide
choice of restaurants, eagerly grazed by the food-crazy cochabambinos, and
the bar scene is lively, driven by students and young professionals. Despite
this, Cochabamba remains a very affordable city, with prices far below those
in Sucre or La Paz. You could easily find yourself staying a lot longer than
you planned.
The city’s name is derived from the Quechua khocha pampa, meaning
‘swampy plain’. Cochabamba lies in a fertile green bowl, 25km long by
10km wide, set in a landscape of fields and low hills. To the northwest rises
Cerro Tunari (5035m), the highest peak in central Bolivia. Cochabamba is
famous for its chicha, a fermented corn drink that is the locals’ favorite
tipple.
Cochabamba
B5
C1
B6
C5
D1
B6
C7
B6
C1
B5
C4
A5
C3
C5
C6
D1
B5
B4
A5
A5
B4
C7
B3
B4
C6
D3
(see 33)
C5
B4
C4
B5
 Top Sights
Convento de Santa Teresa
Palacio Portales
 Sights
1 Cathedral
2 Iglesia & Convento de San Francisco
3 Iglesia de la Recoleta
4 Iglesia de Santo Domingo
5 La Cancha
6 Museo Arqueológico
7 Museo de Historia Natural Alcide d’Orbigny
 Activities, Courses & Tours
8 Bolivia Cultura
9 Centro Boliviano Americano
10 Fremen Tours
11 Instituto Cultural Boliviano Alemán
12 Volunteer Bolivia
 Sleeping
13 City Hotel
14 Gran Hotel Cochabamba
15 Hostal Colonial
16 Hostal Gina’s
17 Hostal Jardín
18 Hostal La Fontaine
19 Hostal Sauna Internacional Inn
20 Hotel Americana
21 Hotel Diplomat
22 Monserrat Hotel
23 Residencial Familiar
 Eating
24 Búfalo’s Rodizio
Casa de Campo
25 Cristal
26 Dumbo
27 Globo’s
28 Gopal
C5
C3
C1
B4
D2
B3
C3
B5
B3
C4
A5
C5
B3
B4
C5
B5
C6
B4
B4
C6
D2
C5
D2
C1
B6
C4
C5
B4
D4
B5
C6
D2
B7
B5
29 Gopinath Uno’
s
30 HWA
31 Kabbab
32 La Cantonata
33 La Estancia
34 Los Castores
35 Páprika
36 Picasso’
s
37 Savarín
38 Sucremanta
39 Sucremanta
40 Super Haas
41
Tunari
42
Vicunqui
 Drinking
43 Café Paris
44 Cerebritos
45 Espresso Café Bar
46 Oásis de Dali
47 Prikafé
 Entertainment
48 Cine Astor
49 Cine Center
50 Cine Heroínas
51 Levoa
52 Lujo’s Discoteca y Karaoke
 Shopping
53 Arte Andino
54 Asarti
55 Los Amigos del Libro
56 Spitting Llama
 Information
57 Argentinian Consulate
58 ATMs
59 Banco Unión
60 Brazilian Consulate
61 Brillante
62 German Consulate
C4
D5
C4
C6
B6
D2
B6
63 Infotur
64 Instituto Geográfico Militar
65 Lavaya
66 Street Moneychangers
67 Tourist Office
 Transport
68 Aerocon
69 BoA
History
Cochabamba was founded in January 1574 by Sebastián Barba de Padilla. It
was originally named Villa de Oropeza in honor of the Count and Countess
of Oropeza, parents of Viceroy Francisco de Toledo, who promoted its
settlement.
During the height of Potosí’s silver boom, the Cochabamba Valley
developed into the primary source of food for the miners in agriculturally
unproductive Potosí. Thanks to its maize and wheat production,
Cochabamba became known as the ‘breadbasket of Bolivia’. As Potosí’s
importance declined during the early 18th century, so did Cochabamba’s and
grain production in the Chuquisaca (Sucre) area, much closer to Potosí, was
sufficient to supply the decreasing demand.
By the mid-19th century, however, the city had reassumed its position as
the nation’s granary. Elite landowners in the valley grew wealthy and began
investing in highland mining ventures. Before long, the Altiplano mines
were attracting international capital, and the focus of Bolivian mining shifted
from Potosí to southwestern Bolivia. Cochabamba again thrived and its
European- mestizo population gained a reputation for affluence and
prosperity.
In 2000 the eyes of the world turned to Cochabamba as its citizens
protested against rises in water rates. The World Bank had forced the
Bolivian government to sell off its water company to US giant Bechtel in
order to provide financing for a tunnel that would bring water from the other
side of the mountains. The resultant price rise brought hundreds of thousands
of citizens out in protest, eventually driving Bechtel out.
CONVENT
PALACE
Politically, Cochabamba is suspended somewhere between the proMorales Altiplano and the pro-autonomous lowlands. In January 2007 proMorales trade unionists and coca growers set up a parallel local government
that demanded the resignation of the pro-autonomy governor. The resultant
clashes left two people dead.
Sights
Cochabamba is Bolivia’s biggest market town and shopping and gastronomy
are what draw in the locals. The town is also blessed with a couple of
interesting mu- seums and a number of attractive churches, though the latter
are usually open only during mass. A convenient tourist bus ( 450-8920;
per person B$25) leaves from Plaza Colón at 10am and 3pm and visits all
the city sights.
Convento de Santa Teresa
Offline map Google map Offline map Google map
(Baptista & Ecuador; admission B$20; tours hourly 9-11am & 2:30-
4:30pm Mon-Fri, 2:30-4:30pm Sat) The most interesting building in town is
the noble, timeworn Convento de Santa Teresa. Visits to this gracefully
decaying complex are by guided tour only and provide a snapshot of the
extraordinary lives led by the cloistered nuns that inhabit it. You see the
peaceful cloister, fine altarpieces and sculptures (from Spanish and Potosí
schools), the convent church and even get to ascend to the roof for a glorious
view over the city. The convent was founded in 1760 and then destroyed in
an earthquake. A new church was built with an excess of ambition, but was
too big to be domed. The existing church was built inside it in 1790. There’s
still a Carmelite community here, but its handful of nuns are now housed in
more comfortable modern quarters next door. It’s a fascinating visit; pacing
the convent’s corridors, you could be in a Gabriel García Márquez novel.
Palacio Portales
Offline map Google map
(Potosí 1450; admission incl guide B$10; gardens 3-6:30pm Tue-Fri,
9am-noon Sat & Sun, English tours 4pm & 5pm Mon-Fri, 10:30am &
11:30am Sat, 11:30am Sun) The Palacio Portales in the barrio of Queru
MUSEUM
MUSEUM
Queru provides evidence of the extravagance of tin baron Simón Patiño.
Patiño’s tastes were strongly influenced by European styles and though he
never actually occupied this opulent mansion it was stocked with the finest
imported materials available at the time – Carrara marble, French wood,
Italian tapestries and delicate silks. The European influence is obvious as
you venture through the building; the gardens and exterior were inspired by
the palace at Versailles, the games room is an imitation of Granada’s
Alhambra and the main hall takes its design inspiration from the Vatican
City. Construction began in 1915 and was completed in 1927. Today it is
used as an arts and cultural complex and as a teaching center.
Take micro E north from east of Av San Martín.
Museo de Historia Natural Alcide d’Orbigny
Offline map Google map
(Potosí 1458; admission free but donations welcomed; 9am-noon & 3-
6pm Mon-Fri, 9am-12:30pm Sat) Adjacent to the Palacio Portales is the
city’s rather more low-key natural history museum. With its creaky wooden
floors and array of stuffed birds and mammals, this is a good way to kill half
an hour while waiting for your Palacio Portales tour to begin. You can also
take a look at the small geological collection.
Museo Arqueológico
Offline map Google map
(Jordán E-199 cnr Aguirre; admission B$25; 8:30am-6pm Mon-Fri, 8amnoon Sat) The Museo Arqueológico provides an excellent overview of
Bolivia’s various indigenous cultures. The collection is split into three
sections: the archaeological collection, the ethnographic collection and the
paleontological collection. The first deals primarily with indigenous culture
from the Cochabamba region. Look out for the Tiwanaku section; their
shamans used to snort lines of hallucinogenic powder through elegant bone
tubes. The ethnographic collection provides material from Amazonian and
Chaco cultures including examples of nonalphabetized writing, which is
from the 18th century and was used to bring Christianity to the illiterate
Indians. The paleontological collection deals with fossilized remains of the
various creatures that once prowled the countryside. There’s good
LANDMARK
CHURCH
MARKET
information in Spanish and an English-speaking guide is sometimes around
in the afternoons.
Cristo de la Concordia
This immense Christ statue standing atop Cerro de San Pedro behind
Cochabamba is the second largest of its kind in the world. Its 44cm higher
than the famous Cristo Redentor in Rio de Janeiro, which stands 33m high,
or 1m for each year of Christ’s life. Cochabambinos justify the oneupmanship by claiming that Christ actually lived ‘ 33 años y un poquito’ (33
years and a bit).
There’s a footpath from the base of the mountain (1250 steps), near the
eastern end of Avenida de los Heroinas, but several robberies have been
reported here and signs along the route warn you of the dangers, not-sosubtly suggesting that you should take the teleférico (Cable Car; return
B$8; closed Mon). On Sunday you can climb right to the top of the statue
(B$2) for a Christ’s-eye view of the city.
The closest public-transport access is on micro E from San Martín and
Sucre. Taxis charge B$40 for the round trip to the top, including a half-hour
wait while you look around.
Cathedral
Offline map Google map
(Plaza 14 de Septiembre; 8am-noon & 2-7pm Mon-Fri, 8am-noon Sat &
Sun) On the arcaded Plaza 14 de Septiembre, Cochabamba’s Cathedral is the
valley’s oldest religious structure, begun in 1571. Later additions and
renovations have removed some character, but a fine eastern portal has been
preserved. Inside it is light and airy, with various mediocre ceiling paintings.
There are statues of several saints, a gilded altarpiece and a grotto for the
ever-popular Inmaculada (Virgin of the Immaculate Conception).
La Cancha
Offline map Google map
(Av Aroma) The main market is the enormous La Cancha, which is one of
the most crowded, chaotic, claustrophobic and exhilarating spots in the
CHURCH
CHURCH
CHURCH
country. Around the markets you’ll find just about everything imaginable,
including pickpockets.
The largest and most accessible area is Mercado Cancha Calatayud,
which sprawls across a wide area along Av Aroma and south toward the
former railway station. Here is your best opportunity to see local dress,
which differs strikingly from that of the Altiplano.
The Mercado de Ferias spills out around the old railway station.
Artesanías (stores selling locally handcrafted items) are concentrated along
the alleys near the junction of Tarata and Arce, at the southern end of the
market area. The fruit and vegetable section is on the shore of Laguna Alalay
in the southeast of town.
Iglesia & Convento de San Francisco
Offline map Google map
(Calles 25 de Mayo & Bolívar) Constructed in 1581, the Iglesia & Convento
de San Francisco is Cochabamba’s second-oldest church. Major revisions
and renovation occurred in 1782 and 1925, however, and little of the original
structure remains. The attached convent and cloister were added in the
1600s. The cloister was constructed of wood rather than the stone that was
customary at the time. The pulpit displays good examples of mestizo design
and there’s a fine gold-framed altarpiece.
Iglesia de Santo Domingo
Offline map Google map
(Santivañez & Ayacucho) The rococo Iglesia de Santo Domingo was
founded in 1612 construction only began in 1778. Its intriguing main facade
is made of stone, with anthropomorphic columns. The interior, with a muchrevered Trinity, is less interesting.
Iglesia de la Recoleta
Offline map Google map
(Plazuela de la Recoleta) North of the river, the baroque Iglesia de la
Recoleta was started in 1654. It houses the attractive wooden Cristo de la
Recoleta.
THE NUNS OF SANTA TERESA
The Santa Teresa convent in Cochabamba houses what remains of an order of cloistered
Carmelite nuns. A strict Catholic order with a strong devotion to the Virgin Mary, the Carmelites
are thought to have been founded in the 12th century on Mt Carmel (hence the name). The order
believes strongly in the power of contemplative prayer and shuns the excesses of society.
In recent times, and with local families believing that a daughter in the convent guaranteed the
entire family a place in heaven, there was strong pressure on the first daughter of every
cochabambino family to enter into the convent. Such was the demand to get some real estate in
heaven that there was even a waiting list set up when no vacancies were available. An elderly nun
had to pass on before a new young nun was allowed in.
Life inside was tough and a rigid class system operated. Those who paid a considerable dowry
(equivalent to more than US$150,000 in modern money) earned themselves a velo negro (black
veil) and a place on the council under the control of the Mother Superior. The council was
responsible for all the decisions in the convent. As the elite members of the order, velos negros
were blessed with a private stone room with a single window, where they spent most of their day
in prayer, religious study and other acceptable activities such as sewing tapestries.
Each velo negro was attended by members of the velo blanco (white veil), second-class nuns
whose family paid a dowry but could not afford the full cost of a velo negro. Velo blanco nuns
spent part of their day in prayer and the rest in the personal service of the velo negro. Daughters
of poor families who could not afford any kind of dowry became sin velos (without veils). These
nuns were employed in the roughest chores of the convent, cooking, cleaning and attending to the
needs of the velo blanco. They slept in communal quarters.
The rules inside the convent were strict. Personal effects were not permitted and
communication with other nuns was allowed for only one hour a day – the rest was spent in total
silence. Meals were eaten without speaking and contact with the outside world was almost
completely prohibited. Once a month each nun was allowed a brief visit from their family, but
this took place behind bars and with a black curtain preventing them from seeing and touching
each other. Visits were supervised to ensure that no rules were broken and no goods changed
hands. The only other contact with the city was through the sale of candles and foodstuffs, which
was performed via a revolving door so that the vendor and the client were kept apart. Such
transactions were the sole source of income for the nuns who were otherwise completely selfsufficient.
In the 1960s the Vatican declared that such conditions were inhuman and offered all cloistered
nuns the world over the opportunity to change to a more modern way of life. Many of the nuns in
Santa Teresa rejected the offer, having spent the better part of their life in the convent and
knowing no different. Today most of the few remaining nuns are of advancing years and while
the rules are no longer as strict as they once were, the practices have changed little. These days
the cloistered lifestyle is understandably less attractive to young girls in an age where their
families permit them to exercise their own free will.
LANGUAGE COURSE
CULTURAL COURSE
LANGUAGE COURSE
OUTDOORS
OUTDOORS
Courses
Cochabamba is a popular place to hole up for a few weeks of Spanish or
Quechua lessons. Cultural centers offer courses for about B$50 per hour.
Centro Boliviano Americano
Offline map Google map
( 422-1288; 25 de Mayo N-365) Can recommend private language
teachers.
Escuela Runawasí
( 424-8923; www.runawasi.org; Blanco Galindo km 4.5, Villa Juan XXIII)
The Escuela Runawasí offers a recommended program that involves
linguistic and cultural immersion from B$1200 per week. It also includes a
trip to a relaxing Chapare rainforest hideout.
Instituto Cultural Boliviano Alemán
Offline map Google map
(ICBA; 412-2323; www.icbacbba.org; Lanza 727) Offers group Spanish
lessons.
Tours
Various agents run a number of activities, particularly excursions to spots of
interest in the province. The following are recommended:
Bolivia Cultura
Offline map Google map
( 452-7272; www.boliviacultura.com; España 301) Professional trips to
Parque Nacional Torotoro and other regional attractions.
Fremen Tours
Offline map Google map
OUTDOORS
MEMORIAL
RELIGIOUS
HOTEL
( 425-9392; www.andes-amazonia.com; Tumusla N-245) Organizes local
excursions and high-quality trips to the Chapare, Amazon and Salar de
Uyuni.
Villa Etelvina
( 7073-7807; www.villaetelvina.com; Juan de la Rosa 908) A good local
operator specializing in trips to Torotoro National Park.
Festivals & Events
Heroínas de la Coronilla
A major annual event is the Heroínas de la Coronilla (May 27), a solemn
commemoration in honor of the women and children who defended the city
in the battle of 1812.
Santa Veracruz Tatala
At the fiesta of Santa Veracruz Tatala (May 2), farmers gather at a chapel
7km down the Sucre road to pray for fertile soil during the coming season.
Their petitions are accompanied by folk music, dancing and lots of
merrymaking.
Sleeping
Don’t be tempted by the rock-bottom prices for accommodation in the
market areas and around the bus station. It’s cheap for a reason: the area is
dangerous after dark and it is in your best interests to stay somewhere north
of Calle Sucre.
 Hotel Aranjuez $$$
( 424-0158; www.hotelaranjuez.com; Buenos Aires E-563; s/d B$460/530,
ste B$665-910; ) In the wealthy Recoleta district north of the center,
this place is making a name for itself at the top end of the scale for getting
the price-to-luxury ratio spot on. As you walk around the wonderfully
decorated salons you could be forgiven for thinking that you were staying in
one of Patiño’s palaces. The place has even been used as a film set.
BOUTIQUE HOTEL
HOSTEL
HOTEL
HOTEL
HOSTEL
Gran Hotel Cochabamba $$$
Offline map Google map
( 448-9520; www.granhotelcochabamba.com; Plaza Ubaldo Anze N-415;
s/d B$700/793, ste B$885-1695; ) Officially Cochabamba’s top hotel,
this five-star beauty is a stone’s throw from Iglesia de la Recoleta and is
housed in the same historic building that once housed the city’s first hotel.
It’s classy, elegant, has a wonderful patio and yet manages to provide
friendly, informal service that most hotels in this category lack.
Puka Killa Bed & Breakfast $$
( 445-9444; www.pukakilla.com; Av Circunvalacion II 946, cnr Av Pando;
s/d/tr B$154/230/310) Meaning ‘red moon’ in Quechua (not cockney!), this
is a great new Italian-run guesthouse in a spacious family house. You get a
home-from-home welcome here and the fact that it is quite a distance from
the center is more than compensated for by value for money.
City Hotel $$
Offline map Google map
( 422-2993; www.cityhotelbolivia.com; Jordán E-341; s/d/f incl breakfast
B$150/200/250; ) This spotless, friendly and central hotel is an excellent
choice. Rooms are bright and well equipped, and the beds are firm and
enticing. There’s a laundry service and cable TV. It’s close to the best value
in town.
Hostal Sauna Internacional Inn $
Offline map Google map
( 452-5382; Junín near México; s/d B$70/140) HSII (it’s much easier to
say it like that!) is great value for basic but comfortable rooms with cable
TV. Your boliviano goes a bit further here than in other nearby hotels and,
despite being a slightly odd addition to the services on offer, the weekend
sauna (3pm to 6pm) may be an added bonus for some people.
Hostal Gina’s $$
HOTEL
HOTEL
PENSION
APARTMENT
Offline map Google map
( 422-2925; www.ginashostal.web.bo; México 346 nr España; s/d/tr
B$130/240/300) Above Gina’s beauty parlor, this is a modern, bright and
freshly furnished hotel. Don’t be put off by the reception (OTT with the
lilac, perhaps?); this is a great place and the larger rooms, equipped with
kitchen and living room, are good value.
Hotel Diplomat $$$
Offline map Google map
( 425-0687; www.hdiplomat.com; Ballivián 611; s/d B$470/540; )
Though the Diplomat, an upmarket business hotel, is clinically efficient in
its service, it has a snobbish atmosphere that some might feel verges on the
unfriendly. There are great views from some of the well-appointed rooms
and it has a good location on Av Ballivián, known as ‘El Prado’ – a center
for shopping or barhopping. Free airport transfer.
Monserrat Hotel $$
Offline map Google map
( 452-1011; www.hotelmonserrat.com; España N-342; s/d B$180/300; )
In a renovated historic building at the heart of the eating and cafe scene. The
rooms are elegant and comfortable, though some are a bit dark. Great views
of the Cristo from the 2nd floor.
Residencial Familiar $
Offline map Google map
( 422-7988; Sucre E-554; s/d B$130/160, without bathroom B$50/100) Set
in a lovely old building, this budget place has plenty of character. It’s built
around a secluded patio, complete with a nude sculpture in the fountain, and
is a real haven from the hustle and bustle of the street outside.
Apart Hotel Concordia $
( 422-1518; Aniceto Arce 690; apt d/tr B$200/250; ) This fading but
likable place is family-run and family-oriented. Two- and three-person
apartments include a bath, kitchenette (dishes available on request) and
phone. Guests have access to the pool and laundry service. It’s north of town
HOTEL
PENSION
HOTEL
PENSION
near the university (so often booked up with students) and accessible on
micro B.
Hotel Americana $$$
Offline map Google map
( 425-0552; Aniceto Arce S-788; s/d/ste B$490/700/910) This friendly
three-star option is a sound choice. The service is good and the spotless
rooms have plenty of natural light and pleasing facilities, including cable
TV. Only the location leaves a little to be desired.
Hostal Jardín $$
Offline map Google map
( 452-5356; Hamiraya N-248; s/d B$100/200, without bathroom
B$70/140) In a quiet part of town, this long-time favorite is centered around
a likably chaotic garden with an enormous starfruit tree.
Hostal La Fontaine $
Offline map Google map
( 425-2838; Hamiraya N-181; s/d B$95/160; ) Decent value, though it
could do with a lick of paint and the religious images adorning the stairwells
are slightly unnerving. Rooms are spacious, with cable TV and minibar, but
those on the ground floor are too dark.
Hostal Colonial $
Offline map Google map
( 458-3791; Junín N-134; s/d B$60/120, without bathroom B$50/100) A
travelers’ favorite, but somewhat overrated considering the facilities and the
other options in this price tier. Rooms are a bit rundown; the best are upstairs
overlooking the leafy courtyard gardens.
Eating
Cochabambinos pride themselves on being the most food-loving of
Bolivians and there is a dazzling array of local specialties for foodies to try,
including lomo borracho (beef with egg in a beer soup) and picante de pollo
ARABIC
LATIN AMERICAN
(chicken in spicy sauce). Ask at the tourist office Offline map Google map (
425-8030; Plaza 14 de Septiembre; 8am-noon & 2:30-6:30pm Mon-Fri)
for its Cochabamba Gastronòmica leaflet.
There’s tasty street food and snacks all over Cochabamba, with the papas
rellenas (potatoes filled with meat or cheese) at the corner of Achá and
Villazón particularly delicious. Great salteñas (filled pastry shells) and
empanadas are ubiquitous; for the latter, try Los Castores Offline map
Google map (Ballivián 790; empanadas B$6), which has a range of delicious
fillings both savory and sweet. Locals swear by the anticuchos (beef-heart
shish kebabs) that sizzle all night at the corner of Avs Villaroel and América.
The jumbo-size Dumbo Offline map Google map (Ballivián 55 or Av de las
Heroínas E-345; mains B$10-79) and Cristal Offline map Google map
(Heroínas E-352; mains B$18-47) serve a range of foods throughout the day,
from pancakes to bland-but-decent burgers and main dishes, and are
particularly popular for a late- afternoon helado (ice cream) and coffee. A
similar place that’s a real fun-palace for children is Globo’s Offline map
Google map (Plaza Colón or Santa Cruz btwn Beni & P Blanco; mains B$27-
79). Balloons, ice creams, juices and kid-friendly meals – it’s got the lot.
Kabbab $$
Offline map Google map
(Potosí N-1392; mains B$30-60; dinner) About thousand-and-one
variations on Persian kebabs served in an intimate space adjacent to the
Palacio Portales. Highlights include clay-oven flatbread, Turkish coffee and
decent baklava.
Tunari $$$
Offline map Google map
(Ballivián 676; mains B$30-70) With the distinction of being the oldest
restaurant in the city, this local favorite specializes in the sort of things you
either love or hate: grilled kidneys (a patent local hangover cure), tripe and
tasty chorizo. But if innards aren’t your thing, there are other typical
Cochabamba plates.
INTERNATIONAL
ARGENTINE
ITALIAN
LATIN AMERICAN
BRAZILIAN
Páprika $$$
Offline map Google map
(Chuquisaca; mains B$27-80) One of the ‘in’ spots, this is a swish
restaurant-bar popular for its food, both Bolivian and international, including
tasty baked potatoes and fondues, and more unusual plates such as ostrich
and llama. After dark it becomes a trendy spot for a late drink and is also a
good place to meet up with young bolivianos.
La Estancia $$$
Offline map Google map
(Uyuni E-786 nr Pasaje de la Recoleta; mains B$38-70) One of a knot of
spacious restaurants across the river in Recoleta, this Argentine-style grill is
a fine place. There are thick, juicy steaks (it’s worth upgrading to the
Argentine meat), ribs and kidneys, as well as fish and chicken, all sizzled on
the blazing grill in the middle. There’s also a decent salad bar and very good
service.
La Cantonata $$$
Offline map Google map
(España & Mayor Rocha; mains B$45-70; noon-2:30pm & 6:30-11:30pm
Tue-Sat) This classy Italian place is one of the city’s most reputable places to
eat. The cozy interior has a roaring fire, candlelit tables and waistcoated
waiters. Pizza and pasta are top notch but pricey.
Casa de Campo $$$
Offline map Google map
(Pasaje de la Recoleta 618; mains B$43-67) A Cochabamba classic, this
loud and cheerful partly open-air restaurant is a traditional spot to meet, eat,
and play cacho (dice). There’s a big range of Bolivian dishes and grilled
meats; the food is fine (and piled high on the plates) but the lively,
unpretentious atmosphere is better.
Búfalo’s Rodizio $$$
Offline map Google map
LATIN AMERICAN
ARGENTINE
LATIN AMERICAN
ASIAN
VEGETARIAN
(Oquendo N-654, 2nd fl Torres Sofer; buffet B$69; noon-11pm Tue-Sat,
lunch only Sun, dinner only Mon) This all-you-can-eat Brazilian-style grill
has smart waiters bringing huge hunks of delicious meat to your table faster
than you can pick up your fork. There’s a large salad bar but, let’s face it, it’s
designed for the carnivore.
Savarín $
Offline map Google map
(Ballivián 626; almuerzo B$19) Despite lacklustre service this is a popular,
well-established barn on Ballivián with a wide streetside terrace where
people congregate at lunchime for filling almuerzos (set lunches) and, in the
evening, for a beer or three.
Vicunqui $$$
Offline map Google map
(www.vicunqui.com; Plazuela Barba de Padilla 277, Acera Norte; mains
B$30-70; noon-11pm Tue-Sat, lunch only Sun, closed Mon) Top marks for
the prime rib and a ‘must try harder’ for atmosphere. The pre-1950s music
played on vinyl records is something you will either love or hate.
Sucremanta $
Offline map Google map Offline map Google map
(Ballivián 510; mains from B$18; lunch) A chain of restaurantes típicos
with two more branches on Hamiraya (Hamiraya 126) and Arce (Arce
340). Here you can sample dependable local dishes, including mondongo
(pork ribs) and menudito (pork, chicken and beef stew).
HWA $$
Offline map Google map
(Salamanca 868; mains B$23-60, almuerzo B$25) If you like Asian food,
you’re in for a treat. Korean and Japanese dishes are on offer and the food is
good.
Gopal $$
MEXICAN
VEGETARIAN
SUPERMARKET
SUPERMARKET
Offline map Google map
(España N-250; mains B$20-40, buffet B$18; lunch daily, dinner MonFri) Half-decent vegetarian dishes, including soy-based versions of Bolivian
dishes and a few curries.
Picasso’s $$
Offline map Google map
(España & Mayor Rocha; mains B$12-49) As with many of the places along
España, Picasso’s blurrs the boundaries between cafe, restaurant and bar,
metamorphosing from one to the next depending on the time of day. It’s
worth a look for its informal atmosphere and Mexican food.
Gopinath Uno’s $
Offline map Google map
(Av de las Heroínas 562 cnr San Martín; almuerzo B$15; 8am-4pm MonSat) Tasty and remarkably cheap, with vegetarian-buffet fare served on
plastic prison-style trays. It also does good fruit salads and soy burgers, but
there’s no alcohol served. Blink and you’ll miss it, though – there’s no sign
outside and it’s barely larger than a walk-in closet.
Self-Catering
IC Norte $
(América at Pando) This is a well-stocked US-style supermarket with
imported and unique export-quality Bolivian products.
Super Haas
Offline map Google map
(Av de las Heroínas E-585) Convenient if expensive mini-market with a deli
and snack counter.
Drinking
There’s plenty of drinking action along El Prado (Av Ballivián) and the
scene also flourishes along España, home to an ever-changing parade of
BEER HALL
BAR
BAR
CAFE
CAFE
CAFE
appealing bohemian cafe–bars.
Kropl’s Bierhaus
(Av América E-992) Home-brew beer, a lively atmosphere and Tex-Mex bar
snacks make this a happening place to hang out.
Cerebritos
Offline map Google map
(España N-251; 6pm-late) A grungy, likable bar with cable drums for
tables and loud rock and hip-hop music. The house special is a mixed platter
of colorful shooters; local students down them as cacho (dice) forfeits.
Oásis de Dali
Offline map Google map
(España N-428) An interesting and popular boliche (nightclub) that
successfully mixes alcohol consumption with an appreciation for art.
Regular exhibitions and live-music performances make it worth staying a
while.
Prikafé
Offline map Google map
(España & Mayor Rocha; 5:30pm-midnight) This cozy corner spot is an
intimate, candlelit place popular with romancing couples. It’s better for
drinks – coffee, wine, cocktails – than the tasty but calorie-laden food.
Espresso Café Bar
Offline map Google map
(Arce 340; 8am-10pm Mon-Sat) Just behind the Cathedral, this wins the
‘best coffee in town’ award. It’s an attractive, traditional-looking place with
pleasant staff. It also serves good juices. A word of advice – don’t order a
‘large’ espresso unless caffeine is more of a compulsion than a pleasure.
Café Paris
Offline map Google map
(España cnr Bolívar; 8am-10pm Mon-Sat) Walls lined with Parisian street
scenes, newspapers on racks and a variety of crepes for every day of the
week. This is a popular, if slightly pretentious, cafe that plays a little too
much on the faux- Francais.
Entertainment
The huge cinema multiplex Cine Center Offline map Google map (Ramón
Rivero s/n) has several screens; more atmospheric are the bright Cine
Heroínas Offline map Google map (Av de las Heroínas s/n) and the smaller
Cine Astor Offline map Google map (Sucre & 25 de Mayo). For information
about what’s on, see the newspaper entertainment listings.
Many of the bars along España and Ballivián turn into minidiscos after
midnight throughout the week, but at weekends the in-crowd head to La
Recoleta and Av Pando to trendy places like Levoa Offline map Google map
(Paseo de la Recoleta). Expect to pay more than B$30 to get in. Elsewhere,
popular dancing spots include Lujo’s Discoteca y Karaoke Offline map
Google map (Beni E-330; 8pm-late Wed-Sun), which, when the clientele
don’t take the music into their own hands, plays salsa and pop.
Shopping
Locally made woollens are available at a few outlets. Try the expensive but
reliable Asarti Offline map Google map (Edificio Colón No 5, Paccieri at 25 de
Mayo), which makes export-quality alpaca clothing, and the cooperative
Arte Andino Offline map Google map (www.artesandinos.com; Pasaje
Catedral s/n). Cheaper alpaca- and llama-wool chompas (sweaters) are
found in the markets. For inexpensive souvenirs, scour the artesanía stalls
behind the main post office.
Decent bookstores include Los Amigos del Libro Offline map Google map
(España cnr Bolívar) and the Spitting Llama Offline map Google map (España
615), both of which stock Lonely Planet books.
Information
Cochabamba addresses are measured relative to the crossroads of two main
avenues, Heroínas (running east–west) and Ayacucho (north–south). Streets
crossing Heroínas to the north are preceded by ‘N’ (norte) and to the south
by ‘S’ (sud). Those that cross Ayacucho are preceded by ‘E’ (este) to the east
or ‘O’ (oeste) to the west. The number immediately after the letter tells you
how many blocks away from these division streets the address falls.
Dangers & Annoyances
According to locals the streets south of Av Aroma are best avoided and are
positively dangerous at night. The bus station is around here, so don’t be
surprised if, when arriving in the early hours of the morning, you are not
allowed off the bus until sunrise. Pickpocketing and petty theft are common
in the markets; don’t carry any more than you are likely to need. The
parkland areas Colina San Sebastián and Coronilla Hill near the bus station
are both extremely dangerous throughout the day – avoid them!
Emergency
Tourist police ( 450-3880, 120; Plaza 14 de Septiembre)
Immigration
Migración Offline map Google map ( 452-4625; La Paz cnr Ballivián;
8:30am-4pm Mon-Fri) For visa and length-of-stay extensions.
Internet Access
If you happen to spot a city block that does not have an internet place let us
know; they are everywhere. Most of them charge B$3 to B$4 per hour.
Laundry
Most hotels offer laundry services, but for commercial lavanderías try
Brillante Offline map Google map (Ayacucho 923; closed Sun) and Lavaya
Offline map Google map (Salamanca cnr Antezana; closed Sun), which
charge about B$12 per kilo.
Medical Services
Ambulance ( 181)
Centro Medico Boliviano Belga ( 422-9407; Antezana N-455) Private
clinic.
Hospital Viedma ( 453-3240; Venezuela) Full-service public hospital.
Money
Moneychangers gather along Av de las Heroínas and near the market at 25
de Mayo. Their rates are competitive but some only accept US cash. There
are numerous ATMs and cash advances are available at major banks; a
handy cluster of ATMs is at the corner of Heroínas and Ayacucho. Banco
Unión Offline map Google map (25 de Mayo cnr Sucre) has one of several
Western Union offices.
Post
The main post (Ayacucho cnr Heroínas; 6:30am-10pm) and Entel offices
are together in a large complex. The postal service from Cochabamba is
reliable and the facilities are among the country’s finest. Downstairs from
the main lobby is an express post office. In the alleyway behind, the customs
office is a good place for sending packages; it stamps them so that they
won’t be opened later and offers a cheaper rate than the post office itself.
Telephone
You’ll have no problem making phone calls. Entel and Punto Viva offices
are scattered around the city and there are also large numbers of private
telephone cabinas.
Tourist Information
Cochabamba has a superb website for visitors (www.cochabambaonline.net). This site also has details and information about places of
interest, links to flight information, hotel listings, photos and local events.
Infotur Offline map Google map ( 466-2277; Plaza Colón; 8am-noon &
2:30-6:30pm Mon-Fri) Very welcoming and hands out good city material.
There are several information kiosks, including at the bus station and airport,
which also open Saturday mornings.
Instituto Geográfico Militar Offline map Google map (IGM; 425-5563; 16
de Julio S-237) For topographic maps (useful for walkers) of Cochabamba
department.
SERNAP Office (Servicio Nacional de Areas Protegidas; Atahuallpa 2367;
8:30am-12:30pm & 2:30-6:30pm Mon-Fri) Has limited information
about national parks. Private tour companies are usually better equipped to
answer questions.
Getting There & Away
Air
The flight between La Paz and Cochabamba’s Jorge Wilstermann
International Airport (CBB; domestic/international departure tax
B$14/170) must be one of the world’s most incredible (sit on the left coming
from La Paz, the right from Cochabamba), with fabulous views of the
dramatic Cordillera Quimsa Cruz and a (disconcertingly) close-up view of
the peak of Illimani. Most flights between Santa Cruz and La Paz touch
down briefly at Cochabamba and the city also connects them with flights to
Sucre. It is a good idea to book your flights in advance.
TAM Offline map Google map ( 441-1545; Potosí cnr Buenos Aires) runs
two or three daily flights between Santa Cruz and La Paz via Cochabamba
and a couple of daily flights to Sucre. Except on Thursdays, there is a daily
flight to Trinidad and Tarija, the latter continuing on to Yacuiba on Tuesday
and Saturday mornings. Aerocon Offline map Google map ( 448-9177;
Aniceto Padilla 755) has a couple of daily flights to Trinidad with onward
connections to the Amazon region, but places are limited. BoA Offline map
Google map ( 414-0873; Jordan 202) flies to the same destinations as TAM
but prices are slightly higher and so they usually fill up more slowly.
Bus
Cochabamba’s main bus terminal ( 423-4600; Ayacucho nr Tarata;
terminal fee B$4) has an information kiosk, a branch of the tourist police,
ATMs, luggage storage and a cambio (money-exchange bureau).
Trufis (collective taxis) and micros to eastern Cochabamba Valley villages
leave from along Av República at the corners of Barrientos or 6 de Agosto.
Torotoro micros (B$25) depart daily at 6pm except Thursday, with an
additional 6am service on Thursday and Sunday. Services to the western part
of the valley leave from the corner of Ayacucho and Aroma. For Villa
Tunari, micros leave from the corner of Av República and Oquendo.
DESTINATION COST (B$) DURATION (HR)
Buenos Aires 550 72
La Paz 45-100 20
Oruro 25 4
Potosí 52-120 15
Santa Cruz old road 54-110, new road 66-120 8-10
Sucre 50-70 12
Villa Tunari bus 15, trufi 35 bus 4, trufi 3
Getting Around
To/From the Airport
Micro B (B$2) shuttles between the airport and the main plaza. Taxis to or
from the center cost B$25.
Bus
Convenient lettered micros and trufis display their destinations and run to all
corners of the city (B$1.80).
Car
Most rental companies have offices at the airport. Sudamericana Rent-aCar ( 428-3132; www.sudamericanarentacar.com; Pando 1187) is a
reliable, long-established option.
Taxi
The taxi fare around the center of Cochabamba is B$6 per person. An extra
boliviano is charged if you cross the river or go far to the south. For a radio
taxi, ring Señor Taxi ( 458-0058).
AROUND COCHABAMBA
Parque Nacional Tunari
This easily accessible 3090-sq-km park was created in 1962 to protect the
forested slopes above Cochabamba, as well as the wild summit of Cerro
Tunari. It encompasses a wide diversity of habitats from dry inter-Andean
valleys to the more humid and highly endangered Polylepis forests of the
Cordillera Tunari.
The SERNAP office in Cochabamba may have simple walking maps of
the park, but often doesn’t have visitor material. A series of small
identification guides to the wildlife of the park have been produced by the
Centro de Biodiversidad y Genética at the Universidad Mayor de San
Simón and can be bought on campus in Cochabamba.
Cochabamba Area
A good dirt road zigzags its way from the park gate (open until 4pm) up the
steep mountain face. About 3km after the gate, you’ll reach a picnic site
with barbecues and a playground. Beyond here is a sendero ecológico
(nature trail). Don’t expect too much in the way of ecología, but it’s a wellmade path that gains altitude rapidly, winding into thickening mature
woodland. The views are tremendous, with Cochabamba spread out below,
and in the opposite direction, Cerro Tunari and the Cordillera. With an early
start and plenty of water you should be able to make it up to some of the
nearer peaks on a long day hike.
Coming from town take micro F2 or trufi 35 from Av San Martín, which
will drop you three minutes from the park entrance, at a big wooden
archway with a fire-risk indicator. You may have to show ID and sign into
the park. From the gate turn right, then left after 100m; the road winds up
past the playground to the lakes.
Cerro Tunari Area
Snow-dusted Cerro Tunari (5035m) is the highest peak in central Bolivia
(it’s the second peak from the left on the Taquiña beer label). Its flanks are
25km west of Cochabamba along the road to Independencia. This
spectacular area offers excellent hiking and camping, but access is less than
straightforward. For climbs, pick up the 1:50,000 map Cordillera de Tunari
(sheet 6342III) from the IGM.
From Quillacollo it’s a complicated four- to five-hour ascent to the
summit, with some sections requiring technical equipment. Experienced
climbers can manage the round-trip in a long day, but the high-altitude
ascent will be more pleasant if you allow two days and camp overnight.
You’ll need a guide to find the best route.
An easier route ascends from Estancia Chaqueri or Tawa Cruz, 12km
beyond Cruce Liriuni (which has lodgings at the village school) at 4200m.
Micros and camiones (flatbed trucks) toward Morochata leave on Monday,
Thursday and Saturday at 7am from three blocks off the main plaza in
Quillacollo; they return to Cochabamba in the afternoon on Tuesday, Friday
and Sunday. The relatively easy path, which takes around five hours,
ascends the north face of the peak.
Another option is Fremen Tours ( Click here ). It leads all-inclusive twoday excursions using the northern route.
RELIGIOUS
WESTERN COCHABAMBA
VALLEY
Quillacollo
Besides Cochabamba itself, Quillacollo (13km west of Cochabamba) is the
Cochabamba Valley’s most commercially important community, although it
has lost much of its independent feel in recent years as Cochabamba’s
growth has more or less absorbed it as a suburb. Apart from the Sunday
market and the pre-Inca burial mound discovered beneath Plaza Bolívar,
the main attraction is the revered Virgen de Urkupiña in its church.
Tradition has it that long ago, the Virgin Mary appeared several times to
a shepherd girl at the foot of the hill known as Calvario. The visits were
later witnessed by the girl’s parents and a crowd of villagers when she
shouted ‘ Orkopiña’ (There on the hill!) as the Virgin was seen ascending
heavenwards. At the summit of the hill, the townspeople discovered the
stone image of the Virgin, which now stands in the church to the right of the
altar, surrounded by votive offerings and commemorative plaques giving
thanks for blessings received.
One thing to do here is to sample garapiña, a deceptively strong blend of
chicha (fermented corn), cinnamon, coconut and ayrampo, which is a local
mystery ingredient from a cactus that colors the drink red.
Festivals & Events
Fiesta de la Virgen de Urkupiña
From August 14 to 18 is the Fiesta de la Virgen de Urkupiña, the biggest
annual celebration in Cochabamba department. Folkloric musicians and
dancers come from around Bolivia to perform and the chicha flows for
three days. It can be a fairly chaotic scene, with more attention paid to
hitting the bottle than on reverence. It’s also very crowded.
RESORT
Sleeping & Eating
Eco-Hotel Planeta de Luz $$
( 426-1234; www.planetadeluz.com; camping per person B$20, full board
dm/s/d/tr B$70/200/ 280/350, 5-person cabins B$525; ) At Estancia
Marquina, 5km north of Quillacollo, is the HI-affiliated Eco-Hotel Planeta
de Luz, a curious place with Gaudíesque architecture, spa treatments, a
sauna, wandering domestic animals and a kooky New Age vibe. The variety
of different accommodation options is as wide as your imagination, from
round huts with circular beds to posh suites. To get here take the Bella Vista
trufi (B$1.20) from Quillacollo.
Getting There & Away
Micros and trufis to Quillacollo (B$2.20, 45 minutes) leave frequently from
Oquendo, Av de las Heroínaś, the corner of Ayacucho and Aroma, and the
corner of Circunvalación and América in Cochabamba. In Quillacollo, the
trufi stop is on Plaza Bolívar.
Tiquipaya
The town of Tiquipaya, whose name means ‘Place of Flowers’, is located
11km northwest of Cochabamba. It is known for its Sunday market and its
array of unusual festivals. In late April or early May there’s an annual
Chicha Festival; in July there is a Potato Festival; the second week in
September sees the Trout Festival; around September 24 is the Flower
Festival; and in the first week of November there’s the Festival de la
Wallunk’a, which attracts colorful, traditionally dressed women from
around the Cochabamba department.
The classy Cabañas Tolavi ( 431-6834; www.cabanastolavi.com;
s/d/tr with breakfast buffet B$280/360/420, cabañas B$390-650; ) has
chalet-style cabañas constructed of perfumed wood, which occupy a
gardenlike setting among the trees. Nonguests can enjoy German-style
meals, including a buffet breakfast. It’s 500m downhill from the trufi stop in
Tiquipaya.
Micros leave half-hourly from the corner of Avs Ladislao Cabrera and
Oquendo in Cochabamba. A taxi costs about B$140.
Villa Albina
If you haven’t already had your fill of Simón Patiño’s legacy in Oruro and
Cochabamba, you can visit Villa Albina in the village of Pairumani and tour
the home the tin baron occupied. This enormous white mansion, which
could have inspired the TV home of the Beverly Hillbillies, was named
after his wife. Albina was presumably as fussy as her husband when it came
to the finer things in life and the elegant French décor of the main house
and the Carrara-marble mausoleum seem fit for royalty anywhere in the
world. There’s a formal garden, complete with topiary, and the family
mausoleum in which the don and his wife were finally laid to rest.
To get there, take a Pairumani trufi from the Plaza Bolívar in Quillacollo
and get off at Villa Albina. It’s only 18km from Cochabamba, but the trip
can take a couple of hours so you might consider a taxi.
Inca-Rakay & Sipe Sipe
The ruins of Inca-Rakay, in the Serranía de Tarhuani, are the most readily
accessible ruins in the Cochabmaba Valley, but they are mostly crumbling
stone walls these days and you’ll need some imagination to conjure up their
former glory. It has been postulated that Inca-Rakay served as an Inca
administrative outpost that oversaw agricultural colonies in the fertile
Cochabamba Valley. That seems unlikely, however, given its lofty position
and the difficulty of access. The rare Spanish-language book Inkallajta &
Inkaraqay, by Jesús Lara, contains good site maps and theories about its
origins and purposes.
The site includes the remains of several hefty buildings and a large open
plaza overlooking the valley. One odd rock outcrop resembles the head of a
condor, with a natural passageway inside leading to the top. Just off the
plaza area is a cave that may be explored with a flashlight. Legend has it
that this cave is the remnant of another of those apocryphal Inca tunnels –
this one linking Inca-Rakay with faraway Cuzco. If you’re there on a smogfree day, the plaza affords a spectacular view over the valley.
Do not camp or spend the night at the unattended ruins. Several readers
have reported serious violent incidents while camping here. The access
town for the ruins is the quiet and friendly village of Sipe Sipe, 27km
southwest of Cochabamba.
If you’re in Sipe Sipe on a Sunday between February and May, try to
sample the local specialty – a sweet grape liquor known as guarapo.
Getting There & Away
From Cochamabamba take a micro to Plaza Bolívar in Quillacollo and there
jump on a trufi or a micro to Sipe Sipe. Inca-Rakay is accessed on foot from
Sipe Sipe. Since staying overnight is not a safe option, you must get an
early start out of Cochabamba; the trip takes the better part of a day and
you’ll need time to explore the ruins.
It’s a 5km, 2½-hour cross-country (but well-signed) walk up a steep hill
from Sipe Sipe to the site. From the southwest corner of Sipe Sipe’s main
plaza, follow the road past the secondary school. From there the road
narrows into a path and crosses a small ditch. Across the ditch, turn left
onto the wider road. Starting several hundred meters up the road from town,
follow a water pipeline uphill to the first major ridge; there’ll be a large
ravine on your left. From there, bear to the right and follow the ridge until
you see a smaller ravine on the right. At this point you’re actually able to
see Inca-Rakay atop a reddish hill in the distance, but from so far away it’s
hard to distinguish.
Cross the small ravine and follow it until you can see a couple of adobe
houses on the other side. In front there’ll be a little hill with some minor
ruins at the top. Climb the hill, cross the large flat area and then climb up
two more false ridges until you see Inca-Rakay.
EASTERN COCHABAMBA
VALLEY
La Angostura
This village stands on the shores of the artificial lake of the same name and
is a popular spot for cochabambinos to head to fill up on fish. It’s on the
route to Tarata, 18km from Cochabamba. There are many places to eat
along the lake shore, which fill you up with enormous plates of trucha
(trout) or pejerrey (king fish) with rice, salad and potato. There are also
places to hire rowboats and kayaks at weekends. From the corner of
Barrientos and Manuripi in Cochabamba, take any micro toward Tarata or
Cliza and get off at the Angostura bridge; if you see the dam on your right,
you’ve gone too far (just). Nearby, on the highway, is the famous open-air
Las Carmelitas, where Señora Carmen López bakes delicious cheese and
onion empanadas (B$3) in a large beehive oven.
Tarata & Huayculli
Tarata, 29km southeast of Cochabamba, is one of the region’s loveliest
towns; a picturesque but decaying beauty that’s well worth a visit for its
noble buildings, cobbled streets and gorgeous plaza, filled with palm trees
and jacarandas. The town’s name is derived from the abundant tara trees,
whose fruit is used in curing leather. Tarata is famous as the birthplace of
the mad president General Mariano Melgarejo, who held office from 1866
to 1871 and whose remains now lie in the town church. While the citizens
aren’t necessarily proud of his achievements, they’re pretty proud of
producing presidents (populist military leader René Barrientos, who ruled
from 1964 to 1969, was also born here), and there’s a huge horseback statue
of him on the main road.
The enormous neoclassical Iglesia de San Pedro was constructed in
1788 and restored between 1983 and 1985; several of the interior panels
include mestizo-style details carved in cedar. The 1792 Franciscan
Convent of San José, which contains lovely colonial furniture and an
8000-volume library, was founded as a missionary training school. It now
operates as a museum and contains the ashes of San Severino, Tarata’s
patron saint, whose feast day is celebrated on the last Sunday in November.
The village also has several other historic buildings : the Palacio
Consistorial (government palace) of President Melgarejo (built in 1872) and
the homes of President Melgarejo, General don Esteban Arce and General
René Barrientos.
Huayculli, 7km from Tarata, is a village of potters and glaziers. The air is
thick with the scent of eucalyptus being burned in cylindrical firing kilns.
The local style and technique are passed down from generation to
generation and remain unique.
From Cochabamba, taxis (B$6, 30 minutes) leave when full and micros
(B$5, 45 minutes) leave every 15 minutes between 5am and 8pm from Avs
Barrientos and Magdalena. There are no micros to Huayculli, but minibuses
running between Tarata and Anzaldo can drop you here.
CHICHA IN PUNATA
This small market town 50km east of Cochabamba is said to produce Bolivia’s finest chicha.
Tuesday is market day and May 18 is the riotous town festival. Access from Cochabamba is
via micros (B$6, one hour) and taxis (B$10) that depart when full from Plaza Villa Bella at the
corner of República (the southern extension of Antezana) and Av 6 de Agosto between 5am and
8pm.
Incallajta
The nearest thing Bolivia has to Peru’s Machu Picchu is the remote and
rarely visited site of Incallajta (meaning ‘Land of the Inca’), situated 132km
east of Cochabamba on a flat mountain spur above the Río Machajmarka.
This was the easternmost outpost of the Inca empire and after Tiwanaku it’s
the country’s most significant archaeological site. The most prominent
feature is the immense stone fortification that sprawls across alluvial
terraces above the river, but at least 50 other structures are also scattered
around the 12-hectare site.
Incallajta was probably founded by Inca Emperor Tupac-Yupanqui, the
commander who had previously marched into present-day Chile to
demarcate the southern limits of the Inca empire. It’s estimated that
Incallajta was constructed in the 1460s as a measure of protection against
attack by the Chiriguanos to the southeast. In 1525, the last year of Emperor
Huayna Capac’s rule, the outpost was abandoned. This may have been due
to a Chiriguano attack, but was more likely the result of increasing Spanish
pressure and the unraveling of the empire, which fell seven years later.
The site is on a monumental scale; some researchers believe that, as well
as serving a defensive purpose, it was designed as a sort of ceremonial
replica of Cuzco, the Inca capital. The site’s most significant building, the
kallanka, measures a colossal 80m by 25m. The roof was supported by
immense columns. Outside it is a large boulder, probably a speakers’
platform. At the western end of the site is a curious six-sided tower, perhaps
used for astronomical observation. On the hilltop, a huge zigzag defensive
wall has a baffled defensive entrance.
The ruins were made known to the world in 1914 by Swedish zoologist
and ethnologist Ernest Nordenskiöld, who spent a week at the ruins
measuring and mapping them. However, they were largely ignored – except
by ruthless treasure hunters – for the next 50 years, until the University of
San Simón in Cochabamba launched its investigations.
At Pocona, 17km from the ruins, there’s an information center and a
small exhibition of archaeological finds from the site.
Tours
Cochabamba agencies run day trips to Incallajta when they have a group
large enough to make it worthwhile. Fremen Tours ( Click here ) is
recommended. Beware of tours that seem suspiciously cheap or that involve
‘trekking’. That usually means getting a cab to the cruce (turnoff) and
walking up to the site – you can do that yourself.
Sleeping & Eating
Without your own transportation, visiting Incallajta will prove inconvenient
at best. Additionally, if you can’t arrange lodging in private homes, you’ll
probably have to camp for two or three nights so be sure to take plenty of
water, food, warm clothing and camping gear. Camping and basic shelters
are available at the Centro de Investigaciones in Pocona.
Getting There & Away
Taxis (B$18, three hours) and micros (B$20, five hours) to Pocona leave
Cochabamba when full between 5am and 6pm from the corner of República
and Manuripi. Get off at the turnoff for the site at Collpa. From here it’s an
8km uphill walk. If you’d rather not walk, Pocona is a further 9km past
Collpa and you can strike a deal with a taxi driver there.
Totora
Totora, 142km east of Cochabamba, huddles in a valley at the foot of Cerro
Sutuchira. It is on the main route between Cochabamba and Sucre, but few
travelers ever see it because most buses pass through at night. Nevertheless
it is a lovely colonial village, built around a postcard-pretty plaza with
colorful buildings and arcades. In May 1998 the town was struck by an
earthquake measuring 6.7 on the Richter scale. While there’s still plenty of
damage visible, much of the town has since been lovingly restored.
The annual town festival on February 2 features bullfights. There’s a
piano festival at the end of September, but Totora’s most charming and
famous festival is that of San Andrés. On November 2, giant swings are
erected on the streets and throughout the month young women who are
hoping for marriage are swung high on them. The women on the swings are
also believed to be helping the wandering souls, who descended to earth on
All Souls’ Day, return to heaven.
CHURCH
The Hotel Municipal (Plaza Ladislao Cabrera s/n; r per person B$50)
is an attractive reconstruction of what was once the town’s hospital and is
one of two good hotels in town. It’s got spacious, comfortable rooms in an
old-fashioned style. There’s also a couple of simple alojamientos (cheap
guesthouses).
Micros (B$20, three hours) destined for Aiquile leave daily for Totora at
6.30am, 11.30am and 5pm from the corner of Avs 6 de Agosto and
República in Cochabamba.
Mizque
This pretty colonial village enjoys a lovely pastoral setting on the Río
Mizque. Founded as the Villa de Salinas del Río Pisuerga in 1549, it soon
came to be known as the Ciudad de las 500 Quitasoles (City of 500
Parasols), after the sun shields used by the locals. It makes a great escape
from the cities and main tourist sights and the few visitors who pass through
on trips between Sucre and Cochabamba are impressed by the beauty of the
Mizque and Tucuna Valleys, where flocks of macaws squawk in the early
morning.
Sights & Activities
There’s a small archaeological and historical museum.
Iglesia Matríz
The lovely, restored Iglesia Matríz, which was slightly damaged in a 1998
earthquake, once served as the seat of the Santa Cruz Bishopric (until the
seat was shifted to Arani in 1767).
Tours
With the help of Peace Corps volunteers, the alcaldía (town hall; on the
north side of the plaza) organizes self-guided hiking circuits and guided
trips to several local sites of natural and historic interest. Moises Cardozo
HOTEL
PENSION
PENSION
at the Entel office or Restaurant Plaza can arrange an interesting visit to his
apiary just outside of town.
Festivals
Besides its cheese and honey, Mizque is best known for its Fería de la
Fruta (April 19), which coincides with the chirimoya (custard apple)
harvest and Semana Santa. From September 8 to 14, Mizque holds the
lively Fiesta del Señor de Burgos, which features much revelry and bulland cockfighting. Monday is market day.
Sleeping & Eating
Mizque has a few cheap Taquiña-sponsored alojamientos that serve typical
Bolivian meals. They’re all within a block of the plaza. Alternatively, you
can eat at the street stalls beside the church.
Hotel Bolivia $
( 434-2158; r per person B$50, without bathroom B$30) Next to the
campesino (subsistence farmer) market on the road to the river, Hotel
Bolivia has firm beds and is probably the nicest place in town.
Hostal Graciela $
( 413-5616; r per person B$50) A good option with rooms that have
decks; it’s affiliated with the also-recommended Restaurant Plaza.
Residencial Mizque $
( 420-0224; r per person B$40) Set amid gardens, this clean place is the
easiest to find if you arrive at night – look for the Prodem sign.
Getting There & Away
Three daily micros (B$20, four hours) leave Cochabamba from the corner
of Avs 6 de Agosto and República at 8am, noon and 6pm; from Mizque
ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITE
they depart for Cochabamba at 8am, 10am and noon, and for Aiquile at
3pm daily. Occasional micros travel between here and Totora – 31km on a
rough road.
AIQUILE
Aiquile is known for some of Bolivia’s finest charangos (traditional Bolivian ukulele-type
instruments) and in late November plays host to the Fería del Charango. The small Museo del
Charango (admission B$10) has some archaeological pieces and holds a collection of the
instruments, including ones that have won prizes at the festival.
Aiquile lies on the main route between Cochabamba and Sucre, but most intercity buses pass
in the wee hours of the night. Buses to Aiquile (B$20, six hours) depart daily at noon and 5pm
from Av 6 de Agosto between Barrientos and República in Cochabamba. It’s about two hours
between Aiquile and Mizque. There are a couple of micros a day, or you can readily thumb a
ride on passing camiones, but be prepared for a real dust bath.
Parque Nacional Torotoro
One of Bolivia’s most memorable national parks, Torotoro at times can
seem like a practical demonstration of geology on an awe-inspiring scale.
Beds of sedimentary mudstone, sandstone and limestone, bristling with
marine fossils and – from drier periods – dinosaur footprints, have been
muscled and twisted into the sharp, inhospitable hillscapes of the Serranías
de Huayllas and de Cóndor Khaka. In places, the immensity of geological
time is showcased, with exposed layers revealing fossils below a hundred
meters or more of sedimentary strata.
Amid it all the characterful, impoverished colonial village of Torotoro
itself (2720m) is one of the region’s most remote settlements (although road
access is steadily improving).
Sights & Activities
Dinosaur Tracks
ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITE
Most visitors to Torotoro come for the paleontology. The village, which sits
in a wide section of a 20km-long valley at an elevation of 2600m, is flanked
by enormous, inclined mudstone rock formations bearing bipedal and
quadrupedal dinosaur tracks from the Cretaceous period (spanning 145
million to 65 million years ago).
There are numerous tracks (huellas) all over the place and much work
remains to be done on their interpretation. Many different dinosaur species
are represented, both herbivorous and carnivorous.
The closest tracks are just at the entrance to the village, on the other side
of the river. Above the water but below the road are the area’s largest tracks,
made by an enormous quadruped dinosaur (diplodocus or similar), and they
measure 35cm wide, 50cm long and 20cm deep. Near here, just above the
road, the angled plane of rock reveals a multitude of different tracks,
including a long set from a heavy quadrupedal dinosaur that some have
posited are those of the armadillo- like ankylosaurus.
Along the route to Umajalanta cave, the flat area known as the Carreras
Pampa site has several excellent sets of footprints (on both sides of the
path). These were made by three-toed bipedal dinosaurs, both herbivores
(with rounded toes) and carnivores (pointed toes, sometimes with the claw
visible).
All the tracks in the Torotoro area were made in soft mud, which then
solidified into mudstone. They were later lifted and tilted by tectonic forces.
For that reason, many of the tracks appear to lead uphill. Many local guides,
however, incorrectly believe that the footprints were made in lava as the
dinosaurs fled a volcanic eruption.
Sea Fossils
In a small side gully, an hour’s walk southwest of Torotoro on the Cerro de
las Siete Vueltas (Mountain of Seven Turns – so called because the trail
twists seven times before reaching the peak), is a major sea-fossil deposit.
At the base of the ravine you may see petrified shark teeth, while higher up
the limestone and sedimentary layers are set with fossils of ancient
trilobites, echinoderms, gastropods, arthropods, cephalopods and
brachiopods. The site is thought to date back about 350 million years.
There’s another significant sea-fossil site in the Quebrada Thajo Khasa,
southeast of Torotoro.
MUSEUM
CANYON
ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITE
CAVE
Pachamama Wasi
(Sucre s/n; admission B$5) This amazing and beautiful house-museum is
the quirky home of a man who has spent years of his life pacing the cerros
with a rockhound’s eye. The house is like a botanic garden, but made of
stones: fossils, geological quirks and unusually shaped rocks form a unique,
soothing ensemble. It’s uphill from the main street but only open when the
owner or his family are at home.
Cañón de Torotoro & El Vergel
Three kilometers from Torotoro, the ground suddenly drops away into an
immense and spectacularly beautiful canyon, more than 250m deep. From
the mirador (viewpoint) at the top you can gaze along it, watching vultures
wheeling. The cliffside here is also home to the rare paraba frente roja
(Red-fronted macaw), which you have a good chance of seeing, or at least
hearing.
From here, following the diminishing canyon along to the left, you come
to a flight of 800 stairs that lead down to El Vergel (also called
Huacasenq’a, meaning ‘cow’s nostrils’ in Quechua), which always has
water and is filled with incongruous moss, vines and other tropical
vegetation. At the bottom a crystal-clear river tumbles down through
cascades and waterfalls, forming idyllic swimming pools.
Batea Q’ocha Rock Paintings
Above the third bend of the Río Torotoro, 1.5km downstream from the
village, are several panels of ancient rock paintings collectively called
Batea Q’ocha because the pools below them resemble troughs for pounding
laundry. The paintings were executed in red pigments and depict
anthropomorphic and geometric designs as well as fanciful representations
of serpents, turtles and other creatures.
Gruta de Umajalanta
The Río Umajalanta, which disappears beneath a layer of limestone
approximately 22m thick, has formed the impressive Umajalanta Cavern, of
which 4.5km of passages have been explored.
RUINS
RELIGIOUS
The exciting descent is moderately physical and you must expect to get
both wet and dirty; there are several parts where you need to crawl and
wriggle to get through and a couple of short roped descents. Make sure you
have good nonslip shoes on.
Inside are some spectacular stalagmite and stalactite formations, as well
as a resident population of vampire bats that have produced an impressively
large pile of steaming guano over the years. You eventually descend to an
underground lake and river, which is populated by small white, completely
blind, catfish. The ascent from here is fairly easy, as it takes a more direct
route.
The 8km one-way walk to the cavern entrance takes two hours from the
village, with plenty of dinosaur footprints to inspect on the way.
There are numerous other caverns in the area, most of which are virtually
unexplored.
Llama Chaqui
A challenging 19km hike around the Cerro Huayllas Orkho from Torotoro
will take you to the ruins known as the Llama Chaqui (Llama’s Foot). The
multilevel complex, which dates from Inca times, rambles over distinctive
terraces and includes a maze of rectangular and semicircular walls, plus a
fairly well-preserved watchtower. Given its strategic vantage point, it
probably served as a military fortification and may have been somehow
related to Incallajta, further north.
Tours
The team at Villa Etelvina are experts in the Torotoro area and passionate
about the national park and the local community. They arrange comfortable
4WD transfers from Cochabamba and put visitors up in their excellent
lodge in Torotoro village. A few Cochabamba agencies ( Click here ) run
trips, including visits to the major sights.
Festivals & Events
Fiesta del Señor Santiago
RESORT
From July 24 to 27, the village stages the Fiesta del Señor Santiago, which
features sheep sacrifices, dynamite explosions, colorful costumes, much
chicha and some light tinku (traditional Bolivian fighting). This is an
interesting time to visit – and there’s much more public transportation than
usual – but the natural attractions are very crowded.
Sleeping & Eating
There are several downmarket residenciales in Torotoro, but few that are
much more than huts with signs. One that’s substantially better is Hostal
Las Hermanas (r per person B$40), which is simple but clean and
comfortable, with hot water; it’s on the street that enters the village, on the
left.
If you wish to camp, locals will expect you to pay. It’s important to set a
mutually agreeable price and pay only the family in control of the land.
Villa Etelvina $$
( 7073-7807; www.villaetelvina.com; Sucre s/n; per person B$150, d
without bathroom B$100) The best option in town, this is a comfortable and
welcoming oasis. As well as having extremely comfortable and stylish
accommodation, it puts on some of the most delicious home cooking you’re
likely to find on your travels in Bolivia. Vegetarian fare is available on
request and is particularly good. The owners can organise transfers from
Cochabamba and professional tours of nearby attractions. Book ahead; they
need notice to accommodate guests.
Information
Information about the park is sometimes available from the SERNAP office
( Click here ) in Cochabamba, but don’t bank on it. You may have more
luck at one of the tour companies or online at www.torotoro-bolivia.com.bo
(in Spanish). On the main street in the village of Torotoro, the tourist office
(Charcas s/n; daily) is housed in the entrance of the alcaldía.
Registration & Guides
In order to protect the park’s geological wonders, it is compulsory to take a
guide on any excursion outside the village. Guides are contracted at the
alcaldía where you also buy your entry ticket (B$20). Hang on to your
ticket at all times as it will be inspected by park rangers. Guides are
unlikely to speak English, but their knowledge of the surroundings greatly
enhances your visit and contributes positively to the local community.
The going rate for a guide is about B$40 per person for a half-day
excursion for groups of 10 to 15 people, more for a visit to the Gruta de
Umajalanta. For dinosaur footprints, it can be very helpful if the guide has a
brush (otherwise buy one) to whisk the dust out of the hollows. If you are
going to the cave, the guide should have head-lanterns and rope.
Getting There & Away
Parque Nacional Torotoro is 135km southeast of Cochabamba in Potosí
department. The road has been improved in recent years, and works are
continuing, but more than half the distance is still a mud road and access in
the rainy season (November to February) can be problematic. Flying is the
best way to arrive.
Air
No air services are scheduled to Torotoro, but you can charter a plane for
about B$1000 per person for up to five passengers return. It takes 30
minutes. Contact Misión Sueca ( 424-6289) for details.
Bus
Buses (B$25, four to seven hours) depart Cochabamba at 6pm from the
corner of Avs República and Barrientos every day except Thursday, with an
additional 6am service on Thursday and Sunday. They return from near the
plaza in Torotoro.
Car & Motorcycle
The most comfortable terrestrial way to get to Torotoro is by 4WD or
motorbike. Tour agencies arrange transfers from Cochabamba; the journey
takes about five hours, depending on road conditions.
You can rent 4WDs in Cochabamba ( Click here ), where you should fill
the tank as there’s no place to buy petrol in Torotoro itself. To reach
Torotoro, head out on the old Santa Cruz road. Once you see the signs
advertising La Angostura, take the uphill right turn that follows the lake
above the village. If you reach the Angostura dam on your right, you have
gone too far by a couple of hundred meters.
Follow this road via Caluyo until you reach the town of Tarata (35km
from the La Angostura turnoff). Cross one bridge, then take a right turn
immediately before a second bridge. About 500m along this road, you need
to cut across the riverbed to your left; on the other side, a good cobblestone
road starts and soon reaches the potters’ village of Huaycullí. Continue on
this road past the town of Anzaldo; this is the last possible refueling place.
About 10km beyond here, you turn left onto a dirt road that is signposted,
but easy to miss. This spectacular road descends into a river valley and
finally makes a precipitous switchback ascent to Torotoro itself.
SUCRE
 4 / POP 215,000 / ELEV 2750M
Proud, genteel Sucre is Bolivia’s most beautiful city and the symbolic heart
of the nation. It was here that independence was proclaimed and while La
Paz is now the seat of government and treasury, Sucre is recognized in the
constitution as the nation’s capital. A glorious ensemble of whitewashed
buildings sheltering pretty patios, it’s a spruce place that preserves a wealth
of colonial architecture. Sensibly, there are strict controls on development,
which have ensured Sucre remains a real showpiece of Bolivia. It was
declared a Unesco World Heritage Site in 1991.
Set in a valley surrounded by low mountains, Sucre enjoys a mild and
comfortable climate. It’s still a center of learning and both the city and its
university enjoy reputations as focal points of progressive thought within the
country.
With a selection of excellent accommodations, a wealth of churches and
museums, and plenty to see and do in the surrounding area, it’s no surprise
that visitors end up spending much longer in Sucre than they bargained on.
Sucre
C4
D4
(see 7)
C5
B6
F5
C3
B3
F5
C5
E5
C5
C6
A1
C5
B6
C5
B6
C2
D3
D6
(see 42)
(see 46)
(see 14)
D2
E7
C4
A3
C3
C6
D3
D3
F6
D2
 Top Sights
Casa de la Libertad
Museo de Etnografía y Folklore
 Sights
Capilla de la Virgen de Guadalupe 1 Catedral 2 Convento de San Felipe Neri 3 Convento de Santa Teresa 4 Iglesia de San Francisco 5 Iglesia de Santa Mónica 6 Museo de Arte Indígena 7 Museo de la Catedral 8 Museo de Santa Clara 9 Museo Gutiérrez Valenzuela
10 Museos Universitarios 11 Parque Bolívar
12 Prefectura de Chuquisaca
13
Templo Nuestra Señora de la Merced
 Activities, Courses & Tours
14 Bolivia Specialist
15 Candelaria Tours
16 Condor Trekkers
17 Fox Language Academy
18 Instituto Cultural Boliviano Alemán
Joy Ride Bolivia
Locot’
s
Aventura
Off Road Bolivia
 Sleeping
19 Casa de Huéspedes San Marcos
20 Casa Verde
21 Grand Hotel
22 Gringo’s Rincón
23 Hostal Charcas
24 Hostal de Su Merced
25 Hostal Las Torres
26 Hostal San Francisco
27 Hotel Real Audiencia
28 La Dolce Vita
C5
C6
D4
D4
D7
D5
C5
E5
E5
A6
D3
D5
A4
C5
(see 18)
C5
(see 29)
C4
A4
D5
C3
C4
E3
A6
D5
A2
C5
C5
(see 44)
B3
B5
29 La Posada
30 Parador Santa María la Real
31 Premier Hotel
32 Residencial Bolivia
33 Samary Boutique Hotel
 Eating
34 Amsterdam
35 Bibliocafé
36 Chifa New Hong Kong
37 El Germen
38 El Paso de los Abuelos
39 El Patio
40 Florín
41 Freya
42 Joy Ride Café
Kulturcafé Berlin
43 La Patisserie
La Posada
44 La Taverne
45 Las Bajos
46 Locot’
s
47 Market
48
Tentaciones
 Drinking
49 La Vitriola
50 Salfari
 Entertainment
51 Centro Cultural los Masis
52
Teatro Gran Mariscal de Ayacucho
 Shopping
53 Inca Pallay
54 Pacha Mama
 Information
Alliance Française
55 Brazilian Consulate
56 Casa de la Cultura
F6
B5
D3
A7
B4
B4
B5
MUSEUM
57 Centro Boliviano-Americano
58 Infotur
59 Instituto Geográfico Militar
60 Migración
61 Oficina Universitaria de Turismo
62 Superlimp
 Transport
63 TAM
Sights
Sucre is positively overflowing with impressive museums, colonial buildings
and ornate churches. For the best view in town, inquire about climbing the
cupula at the national police office inside the Prefectura de Chuquisaca
Offline map Google map (State Government Building), next to the cathedral.
Note the murals depicting the struggle for Bolivian independence as you go
upstairs.
Casa de la Libertad
Offline map Google map
(www.casadelalibertad.org.bo; Plaza 25 de Mayo 11; admission incl
optional guided tour B$15; 9am-noon & 2:30-6:30pm Tue-Sat, 9am-noon
Sun) For a dose of Bolivian history, it’s hard to beat this museum where the
Bolivian declaration of independence was signed on August 6, 1825. It has
been designated a national memorial and is considered the birthplace of the
nation.
The first score of Bolivian congresses were held in the Salón de la
Independencia, originally a Jesuit chapel. Doctoral candidates were also
examined here. Behind the pulpit hang portraits of Simón Bolívar, Hugo
Ballivián and Antonio José de Sucre. Bolívar claimed that this portrait, by
Peruvian artist José Gil de Castro, was the most lifelike representation ever
done of him. The charter of independence takes pride of place, mounted on a
granite plinth. A fine inlaid wooden ceiling and elaborate choir stalls are also
noteworthy.
MUSEUM
MUSEUM
ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITE
Museo de Arte Indígena
Offline map Google map
(www.asur.org.bo; Pasaje Iturricha 314; admission B$22; 8:30am-noon
& 2:30-6pm daily) This superb museum of indigenous arts is a must for
anyone interested in the indigenous groups of the Sucre area, focusing
particularly on the woven textiles of the Jal’qa and Candelaria (Tarabuco)
cultures. It’s a fascinating display and has an interesting subtext: the
rediscovery of forgotten ancestral weaving practices has contributed to
increased community pride and revitalization.
Information in English is available and you can observe the weavers
patiently at work. The contiguous store markets ceramics and weavings, but
it’s a more satisfying experience to buy them direct from the villages where
they are made.
Museo de Etnografía y Folklore
Offline map Google map
(www.musef.org.bo; España 74; admission B$15; 9:30am-12:30pm &
2:30-6:30pm Mon-Fri, 9:30am-12:30pm Sat) Known locally as Musef and
housed in the impressive former Banco Nacional building, this new museum
brings together a series of fascinating displays that vividly illustrate the great
diversity of Bolivia’s ethnic cultures. On the ground floor is a professionally
presented display of masks with more than 50 original examples, some of
which you wouldn’t want to bump into in a dark alleyway. The other
permanent display deals with the Uru-Chipaya culture, with reconstructions
of village life and exhibitions of everyday artifacts.
Parque Cretácico (Cal Orck’o)
(Cretaceous Park; www.parquecretacicosucre.com; admission B$30;
9am-5pm Mon-Fri, 10am-3pm Sat, 10am-5pm Sun) It seems that 65 million
years ago the site of Sucre’s Fancesa (Fabrica Nacional de Cemento SA)
cement quarry, 5km north of the center, was the place to be for large, scaly
types. When the grounds were being cleared in 1994, plant employees
uncovered a nearly vertical mudstone face bearing about 5000 tracks of at
least eight different species of dinosaur – the largest collection of dinosaur
footprints in the world.
CHURCH
CHURCH
MUSEUM
Though you can see some of the prints from outside, entering the familyfriendly Cretaceous Park gives a better panorama; the best light for
photographs is during the afternoon. This slick theme park has a number of
life-size models of dinosaurs, as well as an audio-visual display, optional
guided tours and a restaurant. From the terrace, you can examine the tracks
on the rock face opposite with binoculars, though the exposed prints are
increasingly eroded with every passing winter.
Micro 4 (B$1.50) runs from the center past the site, tell the driver where
you want to get off.
Templo Nuestra Señora de la Merced
Offline map Google map
(Pérez 1; admission B$5; 2-5pm Mon-Fri) Contrary to its ordinary
exterior, this church is blessed with the most beautiful interior of any church
in Sucre and possibly in Bolivia. Because the order of La Merced left Sucre
for Cuzco in 1826, taking its records with it, the church’s founding date is
uncertain, but it’s believed to be sometime in the 1540s.
The baroque-style altar and carved mestizo pulpit are decorated with
filigree and gold inlay. Several paintings by the esteemed artist Melchor
Pérez de Holguín are on display – notably El Nacimiento de Jesús, El
Nacimiento de María and a self-portrait of the artist rising from the depths of
purgatory. The views from the bell tower are splendid.
Catedral
Offline map Google map
(Plaza 25 de Mayo; Sun) Sucre’s cathedral dates from the middle of the
16th century and is a harmonious blend of Renaissance architecture with
later baroque additions. It’s a noble structure, with a bell tower that is a local
landmark. Inside, the white single-naved space has a series of oil paintings
of the apostles, as well as an ornate altarpiece and pulpit. The cathedral
opens on Sundays; otherwise you can enter as part of a visit to the Museo de
la Catedral next door.
Museo de la Catedral
Offline map Google map
MUSEUM
MUSEUM
(Ortiz 31; admission B$20; 10am-noon & 3:30-5pm Mon-Fri) Next door
to Sucre’s Cathedral, this museum holds one of Bolivia’s best collections of
religious relics. There are four sections, ritually unlocked as your visit
progresses. In the entry room is a series of fine religious paintings from the
colonial era. Next, a chapel has relics of saints, and fine gold and silver
chalices. The highlight, however, comes in the Capilla de la Virgen de
Guadalupe Offline map Google map , which was completed in 1625. Encased in
the altar is a painting of the Virgin, the city’s patron. She was originally
painted by Fray Diego de Ocaña in 1601, but the work was subsequently
coated with highlights of gold and silver and adorned in robes encrusted with
diamonds, amethysts, pearls, rubies and emeralds donated by wealthy
colonial parishioners. The jewels alone are worth millions of dollars, making
it the richest Virgin in the Americas.
Museo de la Recoleta
(Plaza Anzures; admission B$10; 9-11:30am & 2:30-4:30pm Mon-Fri, 3-
5pm Sat) Overlooking the city of Sucre from the top of Calle Polanco, La
Recoleta was established by the Franciscan Order in 1601. It has served not
only as a convent and museum but also as a barracks and prison. The
highlight is the church choir and its magnificent wooden carvings dating
back to the 1870s, each one intricate and unique, representing the martyrs
who were crucified in 1595 in Nagasaki. The museum is worthwhile for its
anonymous sculptures and paintings from the 16th to 20th centuries,
including numerous interpretations of St Francis of Assisi.
Outside are courtyard gardens brimming with color and the renowned
Cedro Milenario (Ancient Cedar), a huge tree that is one of the few
survivors of the cedars that were once abundant around Sucre.
Museo de Santa Clara
Offline map Google map
(Calvo 212; admission B$10; 2-6pm Mon-Fri, to 5:30pm Sat) Located in
the Santa Clara Convent, this museum of religious art, founded in 1639,
contains several works by Bolivian master Melchor Pérez de Holguín and
his Italian instructor, Bernardo de Bitti. In 1985 it was robbed and several
paintings and gold ornaments were taken. One of the canvases, however,
was apparently deemed too large to carry away, so the thieves sliced a big
CHURCH
CHURCH
CHURCH
chunk out of the middle and left the rest hanging. The painting has been
restored but you can still see evidence of the damage. Guides may also
demonstrate the still-functional pipe organ, which was made in 1664.
Convento de Santa Teresa
(San Alberto; 10am-noon) The brilliant-white Convento de Santa Teresa
belongs to an order of cloistered nuns. They sell homemade candied oranges,
apples, figs and limes daily by way of a miniature revolving door. The
adjacent Callejón de Santa Teresa, a lantern- lit alleyway, was once
partially paved with cow knee bones laid out in the shape of a cross, a local
good luck symbol known as tabas. The alley was considered to be a haunted
place, inhabited by a variety of local ghouls including a baby with a
moustache and teeth, and the cow knees were thought to be the most reliable
way of protecting passersby. In the 1960s it was repaved with the cobbles
you see today.
Convento de San Felipe Neri
Offline map Google map
(Ortíz 165, entry via the school; admission B$10; 2:30-6pm Mon-Sat)
The view from the bell tower and tiled rooftop of the San Felipe Neri
convent more than explains Sucre’s nickname of the ‘White City of the
Americas’. In the days when the building served as a monastery (it is now a
parochial school), asceticism didn’t prevent the monks from appreciating the
view while meditating; you can still see the stone seats on the roof terraces.
The church was originally constructed of stone but was later covered with a
layer of stucco. Poinsettias and roses fill the courtyard, an interesting
painting of the Last Supper hangs at the entrance and the stairwell is lined
with paintings that prepared the monks for confession.
Iglesia de San Francisco
Offline map Google map
(Ravelo 1 at Arce; 7-9am & 4-7pm Mon-Fri) The Iglesia de San
Francisco was established in 1538 soon after the founding of the city, but
was turned over to the military in 1809. The soldiers weren’t big on
maintenance and it fell into disrepair before eventually being reconsecrated
in 1925. Its most interesting features are its mudéjar (Moorish) paneled
CHURCH
MUSEUM
MUSEUM
PARK
ceiling and the Campana de la Libertad, Bolivia’s Liberty Bell, which called
patriots to revolution in 1825.
Iglesia de Santa Mónica
Offline map Google map
(cnr Junín 601 & Arenales) The Iglesia de Santa Mónica was begun in 1574
and was originally intended to serve as a monastery for the Ermitañas de San
Agustín. However, the order ran into financial difficulties in the early 1590s,
resulting in its conversion into a Jesuit school. The interior is adorned with
mestizo carvings and the courtyard is one of the city’s finest. The church
now serves as a civic auditorium and is only open to the public during
special events.
Museos Universitarios
Offline map Google map
(Bolívar 698; admission B$15; 8:30am-noon & 2:30-6pm Mon-Fri, 9amnoon & 3-6pm Sat) The Museos Universitarios are three separate halls
housing colonial relics, anthropological artifacts and modern art.
Museo Gutiérrez Valenzuela
Offline map Google map
(Plaza 25 de Mayo; admission B$8; 8.30am-noon & 2.30-6pm Mon-Fri)
Run by the university, the Museo Gutiérrez Valenzuela is an old aristocrat’s
house with 19th-century decor and a small natural-history museum.
Parque Bolívar
Offline map Google map
A short walk north of Plaza Pizarro, the elongated Parque Bolívar is
sandwiched between two avenues flanked with trees and overlooked by
handsomely imposing government buildings. It’s a pleasant place for a quiet
stroll and its strongly European style is highlighted by the presence of a
miniature replica of the Eiffel Tower; remarkably, it was built by the same
hand as the original in 1906. The French influence is further seen in an
archway that looks suspiciously like the Arc de Triomphe.
Cementerio Municipal CEMETERY
(entrance on Calle José Manuel Linares; 8:30am-noon & 2-5:30pm) The
enthusiasm surrounding Sucre’s cemetery seems disproportionate to what’s
there. There are some arches carved from poplar trees, as well as picturesque
palm trees and the mausoleums of wealthy colonial families. At weekends
it’s jam-packed with families. You can walk the eight blocks from Plaza 25
de Mayo south along Junín, or take a taxi or micro A.
THE LIBERATOR – SIMÓN BOLÍVAR
Born in Caracas in 1783, Bolívar, greatest of the Libertadores (the liberators) of South America,
was sent to Europe as a 15-year-old to be educated. There the works of Rousseau and Voltaire
awakened notions of progressive liberalism that would change his life and the destiny of a
continent.
Bolívar married a Spaniard in 1802, but she succumbed to yellow fever in Caracas shortly
afterwards. Although he had many lovers, he could never again marry. The death of his wife
marked a drastic shift in Bolívar’s destiny. He returned to France, where he met with the leaders
of the French Revolution and then traveled to the USA to inspect the new order after the
American Revolution. By the time he returned to Caracas in 1807, he had developed his own
revolutionary theories.
In South America disillusionment with Spanish rule was already close to breaking into open
revolt. On April 19, 1810, the Junta Suprema was installed in Caracas and on July 5, 1811, the
Congress declared independence. This marked the beginning of a long and bitter war, most of
which would be orchestrated by Bolívar.
His military career began with command of the Venezuelan independence movement. Battle
followed battle with astonishing frequency until 1824. The independence forces won 35 battles
personally directed by Bolívar, including a few key ones: the Battle of Boyacá (August 7, 1819)
secured the independence of Colombia; the Battle of Carabobo (June 24, 1821) brought freedom
to Venezuela; and the Battle of Pichincha (May 24, 1822) liberated Ecuador.
In September 1822 the Argentine liberator General José de San Martín, who had occupied
Lima, abandoned the city to the Spanish and Bolívar took over the task of winning in Peru. On
August 6, 1824, his army was victorious at the Battle of Junín and on December 9, 1824, General
Antonio José de Sucre inflicted a final defeat at the Battle of Ayacucho. Peru, which included
Alto Perú, had been liberated and the war was over. On August 6, 1825, the first anniversary of
the Battle of Junín, Alto Perú declared independence from Peru at Chuquisaca (Sucre) and the
new republic was named Bolivia in his honor.
But, as Bolívar well knew, freedom means just that and, although he had grand dreams for a
unified state in the north of South America, they would prove difficult to realize. ‘I fear peace
more than war,’ he wrote perceptively in a letter.
Establishing Gran Colombia (which comprised modern-day Venezuela, Colombia, Panamá and
Ecuador) was easy, but holding it together proved impossible. Clinging stubbornly to his dream
of the union, as it rapidly slipped from his hands, he lost influence, and his glory and appeal
faded. Still seeing himself (perhaps correctly) as the best steward of the young nations, he then
tried to set up a dictatorship, saying ‘Our America can only be ruled through a well-managed,
shrewd despotism’. After surviving an assassination attempt in Bogotá, he resigned in 1830,
disillusioned and in poor health. Almost at once, his Gran Colombia dissolved.
Venezuela seceded in 1830, approved a new congress and banned Bolívar from his homeland.
A month later, Antonio José de Sucre, Bolívar’s closest friend, was assassinated in Colombia.
These two news items reached Bolívar just as he was about to sail for France. Depressed and ill,
he accepted the invitation of a Spaniard, Joaquín de Mier, to stay in his home in Santa Marta,
Colombia.
Bolívar died alone on December 17, 1830, of pulmonary tuberculosis. De Mier donated one of
his shirts to dress the body, as there had been none among Bolívar’s humble belongings. Perhaps
the most important figure in the history of the South American continent had died. ‘There have
been three great fools in history: Jesus, Don Quixote and I,’ he said shortly before his death.
One of the final remarks in Bolívar’s diary reads, ‘My name now belongs to history. It will do
me justice.’ It has.
LANGUAGE COURSE
LANGUAGE COURSE
Courses
Sucre is a popular place to learn Spanish and a number of group and
individual programs are available for all levels.
Instituto Cultural Boliviano Alemán
Offline map Google map
(ICBA; 645-2091; www.icba-sucre.edu.bo; Avaroa 326) Offers
recommended Spanish lessons with homestay options and also runs
Quechua classes. ICBA has a German-language library and listings of
rooms for rent. It is affiliated to Kulturcafé Berlin ( Click here ), just down
the road.
Fox Language Academy
Offline map Google map
( 644-0688; www.foxacademysucre.com; San Alberto 30) Fox Language
Academy runs volunteer schemes and learning Spanish or Quechua there
subsidizes English classes for underprivileged local kids. The academy is
inside the Instituto Médico building.
Tours
While Sucre traditionally has been visited for its sublime colonial
architecture and wealth of museums, there’s an increasing amount on offer
in the surrounding area, whether you are interested in indigenous culture or
adrenaline-fueled adventure.
There are numerous agencies in town and nearly all offer trips to
Tarabuco (about B$40 per person) for the Sunday market, including
Candelaria Tours ( Click here ); many hotels and hostales can also arrange
this trip. Many also offer day-trips to the Cordillera de los Frailes, but you
will contribute more to the local communities by going for longer.
Some readers have complained about overcharging by Sucre agencies
when they booked in advance. Make a point of comparing prices before you
sign on the dotted line.
HIKING
OUTDOORS
OUTDOORS
MOUNTAIN BIKING
RELIGIOUS
Condor Trekkers
Offline map Google map
( 7289-1740; www.condortrekkers.org; Loa 457) Highly recommended,
nonprofit tour agency, with all earnings going towards social development
projects. Organizes a series of multiday hikes and volunteer opportunities in
local communities.
Joy Ride Bolivia
Offline map Google map
( 642-5544; www.joyridebol.com; Ortiz 14) Popular hikes, bikes and
horses, with groups leaving almost daily. Also offers paragliding; both
tandem jumps and courses. Bookings and inquiries can be made at the cafe
of the same name.
Locot’s Aventura
Offline map Google map
( 691-2504; Bolívar 465) Hiking, biking, horseback riding and
paragliding. Based at the bar-restaurant of the same name.
Off Road Bolivia
Offline map Google map
( 7033-8123; www.offroadbolivia.com; Ortiz 30) Sharing an office with
tour agency Bolivia Specialist ( Click here ), these are the safest and bestquality quad-biking tours in Sucre.
Festivals & Events
Sucre celebrates its birthday on May 24 to 25 and this usually involves a
visit by the President.
Fiesta de la Virgen de Guadalupe
On the weekend closest to September 8, people from all over the country
flock to join local campesinos in a celebration of the Fiesta de la Virgen de
Guadalupe with songs, traditional dances and poetry recitations. The
RELIGIOUS
B&B
BOUTIQUE HOTEL
following day, they dress in colorful costumes and parade around Plaza 25
de Mayo carrying religious images and silver arches.
Todos Santos
On November 2 Todos Santos (All Saints’ Day) is celebrated with much
fervor.
Sleeping
Accommodations in Sucre are among the country’s most expensive. On the
upside, most of the choices are in typical, attractive whitewashed colonial
buildings built around pretty central courtyards and offer good value for
money. For an authentic Bolivian experience ask at Candelaria Tours (
Click here ) about homestay options (minimum five nights).
The cheapest places cluster near the market ( Click here ) and along
Ravelo and San Alberto.
Casa Verde $$
Offline map Google map
( 645-8291; www.hotelsucrebedandbreakfast.com; Potosí 374; s/d/ste
B$120/195/245, s/d without bathroom B$70/80; ) Treading the thin line
between hotel and top-end hostel, the immaculate Casa Verde is a real home
from home. Deservedly popular and frankly underpriced for the quality of
service, Belgian owner Rene almost bends over backwards to be helpful
and readers quite rightly sing his praises. Rooms are named after Rene’s
children and grandchildren and are arranged around a small courtyard with
a pool. If you visit in winter you’ll be thankful for the thick duvets.
Samary Boutique Hotel $$$
Offline map Google map
( 642-5088; www.samaryhotel.com; Dalence 349; s/d B$450/520;
) Samary has an ambitious concept, reproducing a traditional Chuquisaca
village in hotel form, and it pulls it off surprisingly well. There’s a plaza, a
chapel and even a chichería selling authentic homebrew liquor. Rooms are
of the highest standard, adorned with Yaluparaez textiles and replica rock
BOUTIQUE HOTEL
GUESTHOUSE
HISTORIC HOTEL
GUESTHOUSE
HOSTEL
carvings. Attention to detail is king here. Even the bread is baked fresh
every morning in a traditional oven on the breakfast terrace.
Hostal de Su Merced $$$
Offline map Google map
( 645-1355; www.desumerced.com; Azurduy 16; s/d/tr B$300/450/570) In
true Sucre style, this charming and beautiful hotel is decorated with
antiques and paintings, with rooms set around an intimate, tiled courtyard.
Room No 7 is particularly nice and the view from the rooftop terrace is
stunning. The helpful staff speak English and there’s also a restaurant.
La Dolce Vita $
Offline map Google map
( 691-2014; www.dolcevitasucre.com; Urcullo 342; s/d/tr B$90/140/195;
s/d without bathroom B$55/100; ) A delightfully friendly and spacious
guesthouse, offering a variety of comfortable honey-colored rooms for all
budgets. Guests can use the kitchen, or catch some sun on the terraces and
if you stay more than five nights a discount is offered.
Parador Santa María la Real $$$
Offline map Google map
( 643-9592; www.parador.com.bo; Bolívar 625; s/d B$515/590, ste
B$635-850; ) Swish, stylish and refined, this five-star hotel is
magnificently elegant. It boasts an arcaded courtyard, antique furniture, a
communal spa bath with a view and a curious historic underground section.
Casa Al Tronco $
( 642-3195; Topater 57; s/d B$80/150) This charming guesthouse in the
Recoleta district has just three rooms, so book in advance. Glorious views
of the city from two terraces, use of a kitchen and a welcoming reception
might make you stay longer than planned. Stay more than five nights and
there is a price reduction.
HI Sucre $$
PENSION
HOTEL
HOTEL
HOSTEL
( 644-0471; www.hostellingbolivia.org; Loayza 119; dm/s/d
B$40/140/200, s/d without bathroom B$50/100; ) Set in a building with
attractive original features, Sucre’s HI hostel is one of Bolivia’s few
purpose-built hostels and thus has excellent amenities. It’s clean and
friendly and has a shared kitchen and even some private rooms with spa
baths and cable TV. It is very handy for the bus station too (from the
terminal, cross the street, head left then take the first right).
Hostal Charcas $
Offline map Google map
( 645-3972; Ravelo 62; s/d B$70/130, without bathroom B$40/80) In a
central location opposite the market, this is a travelers’ favorite. Laundry
service, 24-hour hot water and simple but clean and attractive rooms mean
it’s a reliable bet and more than the sum of its parts. Breakfast is available.
Grand Hotel $$
Offline map Google map
( 645-2461; Arce 61; s/d B$130/180; ) With a central location,
excellent staff and tastefully decorated rooms, this really is a grand hotel
and a deserved favorite among travelers of all budgets. There’s a popular
restaurant here, a beautiful plant-filled courtyard and some of the spacious
rooms have their own separate lounge area.
Premier Hotel $$
Offline map Google map
( 645-3510; San Alberto 43; s/d/ste B$150/ 250/450; ) A handsome
modern option catering for the local business-traveler market, this has a
central courtyard and is sparklingly clean, with leather armchairs, and
rooms with inviting beds and minibars. It’s in the heart of town but pretty
quiet.
Gringo’s Rincón $
Offline map Google map
HOTEL
BOUTIQUE HOTEL
HOTEL
HOSTEL
(Loa 743; dm B$50) A bit improvised (without a phone so far!), this is a
new dorm-only hostel for young party-loving backpackers interested in
meeting up with a like-minded crowd. It’s clean, spacious and friendly, but
can get noisy.
Casa Kolping $$
( 642-3812; www.grupo-casas-kolping.net; Pasaje Iturricha 265; s/d
B$190/280; ) High on a hill by Plaza Anzures, with great views over
town, this excellent hotel caters mostly for conferences but is an appealing
place to stay. As well as efficient service and a good restaurant, it boasts
clean, well-equipped rooms that are on the smallish side but very
comfortable. It’s also a good place for kids, with family apartments, plenty
of space and a ping-pong table.
La Posada $$
Offline map Google map
( 646-0101; www.hotellaposada.com.bo; Audien- cia 92; s/d/ste
B$250/380/500; ) This comfortable and classy place has spacious,
uncluttered rooms with a very appealing colonial ambience and wooden
trimmings. There are views over town, a stylish and intimate feel, and a
good family suite. The courtyard restaurant is also a recommended spot.
Excellent service adds to the package.
Hotel Real Audiencia $$
Offline map Google map
( 643-1712; www.hotelrealaudiencia.net; Potosí 142; s/d/ste
B$315/385/525; ) This welcoming place in an appealing part of Sucre
has a mixture of old and new. It’s attractively set out, with a pool area and
Mediterranean-style balustrades. Rooms are spacious and have cable TV,
but the ‘executive’ suites in a more modern wing are significantly better,
with beautiful furniture and a minibar, for not much more cash.
Hostal Las Torres $$
Offline map Google map
PENSION
PENSION
PENSION
( 644-2888; www.lastorreshostal.com; San Alberto 19; s/d incl breakfast
B$140/220) Light and pleasant, this attractive hostel is entered down a little
alleyway. The rooms have comfy beds with cutesy frilly coverings, cable
TV and good bathrooms. Breakfast is served in an elegant dining room.
Hostal San Francisco $
Offline map Google map
( 645-2117; Arce 191; s/d B$70/120) With a stunning entry hall and eyecatchingly ornamental staircase, this place belongs in a higher price bracket,
but while the rooms don’t quite live up to the initial impression, you won’t
feel you’ve wasted your bolivianos.
Casa de Huéspedes San Marcos $
Offline map Google map
( 646-2087; Arce 233; s/d B$50/100, without bathroom B$40/80) This
place gets a good rap from travelers, who appreciate its friendly owners and
clean, quiet rooms as well as kitchen and laundry access.
Residencial Bolivia $
Offline map Google map
( 645-4346; San Alberto 42; s/d B$80/150, without bathroom B$55/100)
Good location with rooms set around a triple courtyard, some of which are
markedly nicer than others – ask to see a selection before making your
choice if you want value for money.
Eating
The cosmopolitan population in Sucre ensures a pleasing variety of quality
restaurants and keeps prices competitive. It’s a great place to spend time
lolling around cafes while observing Bolivian university life.
Good salteñerías (specializing in salteñas) include El Patio Offline map
Google map (San Alberto 18; 9am-12:30pm) and El Paso de los Abuelos
Offline map Google map (Bustillos 216); get there early as they sell out fast.
INTERNATIONAL
INTERNATIONAL
INTERNATIONAL
ARGENTINE
INTERNATIONAL
Thanks to Sucre’s status as Bolivia’s chocolate capital, there are plenty of
stores that cater to those with a sweet tooth along Arenales.
Tentaciones $$
Offline map Google map
(Arenales 11; mains B$20-40) Although the gourmet pizza and pasta are
advertised as the main draw here, this stylish contemporary cafe-restaurant
is worth a visit if only to sample the fantastically inventive nonalcoholic
fruit juice cocktails.
El Huerto $$
( 645-1538; Cabrera 86; mains B$25-40) Set in a lovely secluded garden,
this is a favorite spot for Sucre’s people in the know. It’s got the atmosphere
of a classy lawn party, with sunshades and grass underfoot; there’s great
service and stylishly presented traditional plates (especially the chorizo)
that don’t come much better anywhere in the country.
Florín $$
Offline map Google map
(Bolívar 567; mains B$35-45) One of the places to be seen in Sucre, this
atmospheric bar-restaurant serves a mixture of typical Bolivian food and
international dishes, including a ‘Full English’ breakfast. Popular with
locals and gringos alike, who line up along the enormous 13m-long bar
(surely the biggest in Bolivia?) at night to swill down the beers.
Churrasquería Cumaná $$$
(Plaza Cumaná, Barrio Petrolero; mains B$40-70; dinner only Tue-Thu,
11:30am-10:30pm Fri-Sun) A Sucre secret, this carnivore’s delight is in the
Barrio Petrolero, a cab ride east from the center. The full portions of
exquisitely grilled meat can comfortably feed two; the courtyard is also a
pleasant place to drink wine or cocktails.
Joy Ride Café $$
Offline map Google map
FRENCH
INTERNATIONAL
INTERNATIONAL
CHINESE
LATIN AMERICAN
(Ortiz 14; mains B$25-50; 7:30am-2am Mon-Fri, 9am-2am Sat & Sun)
‘Probably the Best Bar in Town,’ or so the promotion will have you believe.
This wildly popular gringo-tastic cafe, restaurant and bar has everything,
from dawn espressos to midnight vodkas and nightly movies to weekend
table-dancing. It’s spacious, friendly, well run and you’ll need an hour just
to read through the menu.
La Taverne $$
Offline map Google map
(Arce 35; mains B$20-48) With a quiet sophisticated atmosphere, the
restaurant of the Alliance Française is a delight to visit. The short, select
menu has a French touch and there are excellent daily specials. There’s live
music every Friday night and film screenings several times a week.
Locot’s $$
Offline map Google map
(Bolívar 465; mains B$20-42; 8am-late) Relaxed and attractive, this barrestaurant is in an interesting old building, with original art on the walls. It
offers a wide choice of Bolivian, Mexican and international food, including
vegetarian, and a gringo-friendly vibe.
Amsterdam $
Offline map Google map
(Bolívar 426; sandwiches B$15-25) Founded with the intention of
supporting the Centro Educativo Ñanta (a charity for street children),
having a snack or two in Amsterdam gives something back to the
community. Dutch owned, but you guessed that already didn’t you?
Chifa New Hong Kong $$
Offline map Google map
(San Alberto 242; mains B$30-50) Good-value Chinese food with huge
portions. Watch your head on the ceiling upstairs though!
Bibliocafé $$
BAKERY
CAFE
INTERNATIONAL
CHORIZO
Offline map Google map
(Ortiz 42 & 50; mains B$20-40; 11am-3am) With two adjacent locations,
this has something for everyone; one side is dark and cozy, the other a little
smarter. There’s good service, a menu of pasta and Mexican-Bolivian food
and drinks until late in a cheerful and unpretentious atmosphere, plus
regular live music.
La Patisserie $
Offline map Google map
(Audiencia 17; snacks B$10-25; 8:30am-12:30pm & 3:30-8:30pm MonFri) An elegant French-style tearoom and bakery, specializing in crepes,
quiches and desserts in the evening and offering fullsome breakfasts in the
morning.
Café Gourmet Mirador $
(Plaza Anzures; mains B$15-25; 9am-7pm) Enjoy the best view in town
from this friendly little cafe. The menu is simple with a selection of
sandwiches, pasta and desserts, but after climbing the steps to Antunes you
are more likely to be wooed by the fruit juice selection. A percentage of
profits goes to a local children’s home. Ask staff whether the adjacent
Museo Tanga Tanga has reopened yet.
Kulturcafé Berlin $$
Offline map Google map
(Avaroa 334; mains B$29-35; closed Sun) This quiet spot is affiliated
with the ICBA and offers German-language newspapers and magazines, a
book exchange and filling dishes; try the papas rellenas (spicy filled
potatoes). It’s also a good bet for an evening beer, with some German
choices.
Las Bajos $$
Offline map Google map
(Loa 759; mains B$25-50) One of the oldest and most typical of the
choricerías (restaurants specializing in chorizo) in Sucre, though it’s not
INTERNATIONAL
VEGETARIAN
INTERNATIONAL
MARKET
just sausage on the menu. The owner is a Beatles fanatic and downstairs is a
miniature recreation of Liverpool’s Cavern Club, the walls adorned with
posters, album covers and other Fab Four memorabilia. On Saturday night it
metamorphoses into a hard-rock bar.
La Posada $$$
Offline map Google map
(Audiencia 92; mains B$30-60; closed Sun dinner) This comfortable
hotel also has one of Sucre’s most appealing spots for a meal or a drink,
offering elegant indoor and outdoor seating around its stone-flagged
courtyard. There are tasty fish and meat dishes, pastas and salads, set meals
and good-natured service.
Freya $
Offline map Google map
(Loa 751; almuerzo B$20; noon-2pm Mon-Sat; ) Part of the Freya
Gym, this likable place serves tasty vegetarian almuerzos, though the
choice is very limited.
El Germen $$
Offline map Google map
(San Alberto 237; mains B$25-40, vegetarian almuerzo B$20; ) This
simply decorated, peaceful spot is a favorite for its tasty vegetarian dishes;
it also does decent goulash and roast meat, as well as cracking curries and
tempting cakes. There’s a book exchange too.
Self-Catering
Market
Offline map Google map Offline map Google map
( 7am-7:30pm Mon-Sat, breakfast only Sun) The central market is home
to some gastronomic highlights. Don’t miss the fresh juices and fruit salads
– they are among the best in the country. The vendors and their blenders
SUPERMARKET
DISCO
DISCO
KARAOKE
PUB
always come up with something indescribably delicious; try jugo de tumbo
(unripe passion-fruit juice).
Supermercado SAS
(Pérez 331; 8am-10pm daily) A megalithic reply to all your shopping
cries for help.
Drinking
Many of the places mentioned in the Eating section, such as Joy Ride,
Amsterdam, Locot’s, Bibliocafé and Florín, are popular spots for a drink
too, and get pretty lively – especially during their respective happy hours.
For discotecas (weekends only) you’ll need to head north of the center;
it’s easiest by taxi.
Mooy
(Pérez 331, inside Supermercado SAS; admission B$20-60) An upmarket
disco-bar for young ravers with cash to splash. There is frequent live music
and it attracts the top bands and DJs from across the country.
Mitos
(Cerro s/n; admission women/men B$5/10) Mitos is a spacious basement
spot a 15-minute walk north of the center. It really fills up around 1am and
plays well-loved local and international hits.
La Vitriola
Offline map Google map
(Urcullo) End point for the organized bar crawls, this is a lively karaoke bar
for those who like the sound of their own voice, even if others don’t.
Salfari
Offline map Google map
(Bustillos 237; 8pm-3am) This little gem of a pub has friendly service, a
loyal local crowd and lively games of poker and cacho (dice) usually going
PERFORMING ARTS
FOLKLORE
on. Try its tasty but potent homemade fruit shots.
Entertainment
Southeast of the center, the Teatro al Aire Libre is a wonderful outdoor
venue for musical and other performances. Teatro Gran Mariscal de
Ayacucho Offline map Google map (Plazuela Libertad) is an opulent old opera
house. The tourist office ( Click here ) and the Casa de la Cultura both
distribute a monthly calendar of events. Cine SAS (Pérez 331, inside
Supermercado SAS) has three screens showing the latest Hollywood film
releases.
Centro Cultural los Masis
Offline map Google map
( 645-3403; Bolívar 561; 10am-noon & 3:30-9pm Mon-Fri) The
Centro Cultural los Masis hosts concerts and other cultural events. It also
has a small museum of local musical instruments and offers Quechua
classes.
Orígenes Bolivianos
( 645-7091; Azurduy 473; 7-11pm Tue-Sat) Runs a highly entertaining
twice-weekly Bolivian folklore show including dances, music and costumes
from across the country. Tickets available in advance from Candelaria Tours
( Click here ).
Cultural Centers
There’s a monthly brochure detailing Sucre’s cultural events; look for it at
tourist offices or in bars and restaurants. Besides the Instituto Cultural
Boliviano Alemán ( Click here ), the following establishments can provide
language assistance and host cultural events.
Alliance Française Cultural center
Offline map Google map
( 645-3599; www.afbolivia.org; Arce 35) French-language library and
foreign films; also home to the La Taverne restaurant.
ARTS & CRAFTS
ARTS & CRAFTS
Casa de la Cultura Cultural center
Offline map Google map
( 645-1083; Argentina 65) Hosts art and artesanía exhibitions as well as
music recitals and the public library.
Centro Boliviano-Americano Cultural center
Offline map Google map
( 644-1608; www.cba.com.bo; Calvo 301) English- language library. Also
referrals for Spanish- language tutors and homestay courses.
Shopping
The best place to learn about traditional local weavings is the Museo de
Arte Indígena, but to buy them you are best off going direct to the villages.
Prices are steep by Bolivian standards, but the items are high quality.
A trip to the Mercado Americano, around the junction of Mujía and
Reyes, will keep clothes-junkies busy for hours, while nearby on Aguirre
the Mercado Campesino is a fascinating traditional food market with a
really authentic feel. Take micro 7 or G northbound from the center.
Inca Pallay
Offline map Google map
( 646-1936; www.incapallay.org; Audiencia 97) This weavers and
artisans cooperative has an impressive array of high-quality handmade
crafts, not all from the Sucre area. Prices are high, but this store returns the
highest percentage to the weavers themselves. You can sometimes see
weavers at work in the patio.
Pacha Mama
Offline map Google map
(Audiencia 76) A new store with the biggest and best selection of local
artesanías in town. Aymará owner Sayda Quispe offers some of his own
jewellery and clothing designs. It’s also a sales point for Lonely Planet
books.
Information
Emergency
Tourist police ( 648-0467; Plazuela Zudáñez) Sucre has long enjoyed a
reputation as one of Bolivia’s safest towns, but occasionally visitors are
harassed by bogus police or ‘fake tourists.’ If you have a problem, report it
to the tourist police.
Immigration
Migración ( 645-3647; Bustillos 284; 8:30am-4:30pm Mon-Fri) A
no-fuss place to extend visas and lengths of stay.
Laundry
Lavandería LG (Loa 407; per kg B$12; daily) Delivers to hotels.
Limpecable (Pérez 331, in Supermercado SAS; per kg B$12; daily)
Superlimp Offline map Google map (Estudiantes 26; per kg B$12 ;
8:30am-8pm Mon-Sat)
Medical Services
Hospital Santa Bárbara ( 646-0133; cnr Ayacucho & René Moreno)
Good hospital.
Money
ATMs are located all around the city center but not at the bus station.
Businesses with ‘Compro Dólares’ signs only change cash. Street money
changers, who operate outside the market along Av Hernando Siles, are
handy on weekends when banks are closed but check rates beforehand.
Internet Access, Post & Telephone
The main post office (cnr Estudiantes & Junín) has an aduana (customs)
office downstairs for encomiendas (parcels). It doesn’t close for lunch and
is open late. There are many Entel (España & Urcullo, Main branch;
opens 8am) and Punto Viva (Arce) centers around, charging competitive
rates for international calls, and most have internet access (B$3 to B$4 per
hour).
Tourist Information
In addition to the following, there are tourist information booths at the
airport, bus terminal and Plazuela Libertad.
Infotur Offline map Google map ( 645-5983; Dalence 1; 8am-noon & 4-
6pm Mon-Sat, 9am-noon & 2:30-6pm Sat & Sun) Up the stairs behind the
Prefectura de Chuquisaca. Can help with information about the Chuquisaca
region.
Instituto Geográfico Militar Offline map Google map ( 645-5514; Arce)
Topographic maps of Chuquisaca department.
Oficina Universitaria de Turismo Offline map Google map ( 644-7644;
Estudiantes 49; 4-7pm Mon-Sat, 2-7pm Sun) Information office run by
university students. Sometimes offers guides for city tours.
Getting There & Away
Air
The domestic departure tax is B$11. Sucre has daily flights to Tarija and
Cochabamba with TAM ( 646-0944; Bustillos) and Aerocon ( 645-
0007; Juana Azurduy Airport). Flights to Cochabamba connect with La Paz
and Santa Cruz so they fill up fast and you will need to book ahead. Juana
Azurduy Airport ( 645-4445) is frequently shut in bad weather, so check
with the airline before heading out there.
Bus & Shared Taxi
The Bus Terminal ( 644-1292) is a 15-minute walk uphill from the
center and most easily accessed by micros A or 3 (B$1.50) from along
Ravelo, or by taxi (as the micros are too crowded for lots of luggage).
Unless you’re headed for Potosí, it’s wise to book long-distance buses a day
in advance in order to reserve a seat. There’s a terminal tax of B$2.50;
services include an information kiosk but no ATM. To save the trip to the
bus station many central travel agents also sell tickets on selected services
for a small commission.
If you are headed to Tarija, Villazón or Uyuni, you’ll have more luck
going to Potosí; the quickest and comfiest (if not the cheapest) way to get
there is in a shared taxi (B$50, two hours), which can be arranged through
your hotel or by calling direct. Try Turismo Global ( 642-5125), Cielito
Lindo ( 644-1014) or Infinito del Sur ( 642-2277).
DESTINATION COST (B$) DURATION (HR)
Camiri 100 14
Cochabamba 50-70 12
La Paz 70-135 14-16
Oruro 50-60 10
Potosí 15-0 3
Santa Cruz 94-105 15-20
Getting Around
To/From the Airport
The airport, 9km northwest of town, is accessed by micros 1 or F (allow an
hour to be safe) from Av Hernando Siles, by the banderita blanca taxi from
Av España, or by taxi (fixed tariff B$25).
Bus & Micro
Lots of buses and micros (B$1.50) ply circuitous routes around the city’s
one-way streets and all seem to congregate at or near the market between
runs. They’re usually crowded, but fortunately Sucre is a town of short
distances. The most useful routes are micros 7, C and G that climb the steep
Av Grau hill to La Recoleta, and micro A, which serves the main bus
terminal.
Rental Car
Imbex ( 646-1222; Serrano 165 btwn Bolívar and Potosí) 4WDs from
B$350 a day.
Taxi
The city center is small enough to walk to most places, but taxis (day/night
per person B$4/5) are available if you want to go further afield or can’t face
the hills.
TRADITIONAL
AROUND SUCRE
Tarabuco
 4 / POP 19,500 / ELEV 3200M
This small, predominantly indigenous village 65km southeast of Sucre is
famous for its textiles, among the most renowned in all of Bolivia. To
travelers though, Tarabuco is best known for its Sunday market, a popular
day trip from Sucre, and for its annual Pujllay celebrations in March.
Tarabuco’s colorful, sprawling market, which features high-quality
artesanías (pullovers, charangos, coca pouches, ponchos and weavings that
feature geometric and zoomorphic designs), is one of Bolivia’s most popular.
By any standards, it’s pretty touristy, which has meant the inevitable arrival
of higher prices and lots of articles from well outside the local area. While
there is some very high-quality work here, there’s also a lot of generic stuff
and few bargains to be had.
On market days, the Centro Artesanal Inca Pallay (Murillo 25) sells an
array of local weavings and serves meals in its tourist-friendly restaurant.
Several places put on exhibitions of pujllay dancing while the market is on,
for a small charge.
Festivals & Events
Pujllay
On March 12, 1816, Tarabuco was the site of the Battle of Jumbati, in which
the villagers defended themselves under the leadership of a woman, doña
Juana Azurduy de Padilla, and liberated the town from Spanish forces. In
commemoration of the event the village stages Pujllay (‘play’ in Quechua)
on the third Sunday in March, when more than 60 surrounding communities
turn up in local costume. The celebration begins with a Quechua mass and
procession followed by the Pukara ceremony, a Bolivian version of
HOSTEL
LATIN AMERICAN
Thanksgiving. Folk dancers and musicians perform throughout the two-day
weekend fiesta. It’s one of Bolivia’s largest festivals and is great fun.
Sleeping & Eating
During Pujllay accommodations fill up quickly, so you may want to hedge
your bets and carry camping gear. Alternatively you can speak to the tourist
office in Sucre about the possibilities of lodging with a local family (B$20
per person).
The plaza and nearby streets have a handful of basic restaurants. Meals of
chorizo, soup and charquekan (dried llama meat served with potatoes and
corn) are available from street stalls during market hours.
HI Centro Ecológico Juvenil $
( 644-0471; r per person B$60) The nicest digs are at Centro Ecológico
Juvenil, which is signposted from the plaza. The Centro is a member of
Hostelling International and has brand spanking new rooms arranged around
a little courtyard. They can also arrange meals if you are peckish.
Maliki $$
(just off the plaza; mains B$25-60) About the best place to eat in town and a
notable step up in quality from the street stalls. Meats and chicken
predominate, served in an attractive, sunny courtyard.
ICLA
With Tarabuco becoming a bit of a tourist trap these days, more adventurous travelers will no
doubt be in search of an alternative destination that is really off the beaten track. Icla, 120km from
Sucre, just about fits the bill. Set in an imposing canyon dripping with waterfalls and riddled with
caves, this remote area is of extreme natural beauty and you won’t see another tourist for miles.
Scores of dinosaur footprints surround the area and you may be able to convince locals to show
you the geological formations and cave paintings in some of the more accessible caves.
To get here you’ll need to take micro 14 or B from Calle Ravelo in Sucre to the town of
Pokonas, from where you can organise a ride on to Icla. It’s definitely worth the trip.
Getting There & Away
The easiest way to get to Tarabuco is by charter bus (B$40 round-trip, two
hours each way) from Sucre, which leaves from outside Hostal Charcas (
Click here ) on Ravelo around 8:30am. Tickets must be bought in advance
from bigger hotels or any travel agent. From Tarabuco, the buses return to
Sucre any time between 1pm and 3pm.
Alternatively, micros (B$10, two hours) leave when full from Av de las
Américas in Sucre on Sunday between 6:30am and 9:30am. Returns to Sucre
leave between 11am and 3:30pm.
Candelaria
The Sunday market in Tarabuco is fairly touristy these days, so to get a
better idea of the regional culture and textiles you could visit the appealingly
rustic indigenous village of Candelaria, which produces many of the finest
handweavings – blankets, rugs, ponchos and bags – in the local style.
There’s a very traditional way of life here and it’s far removed from the
bustle of Sucre or Tarabuco. The community has established a weaving
association, which owns a museum (admission B$5) and textile store that
explain the intricate weavings with displays depicting their culture rendered
in vividly colored yarns. The store contains a large selection of the same
high-quality weaving found in Sucre but at lower prices, with 100% of the
profits going back into the small fair-trade association.
Some Sucre operators ( Click here ) run tours leaving for Candelaria on
Saturday, staying the night and proceeding to Tarabuco’s market on Sunday
morning. Candelaria Tours ( Click here ) runs a highly recommended
excursion, overnighting in a beautiful colonial hacienda. The weaving
association can also arrange stays in private homes but this is best arranged
in advance through an agency in Sucre. Do not arrive in town without an
arrangement for accommodation, as there are no formal hotels.
There are buses from Sucre to Candelaria at 4pm on Tuesday, Thursday
and Saturday. They are run by Flota Charcas and leave from the clock
tower on Av Mendoza (the ring road). Several camiones pass through
Candelaria daily, heading for Sucre.
Cordillera de los Frailes
The imposing serrated ridge forming Sucre’s backdrop creates a formidable
barrier between the departments of Chuquisaca and Potosí. It’s home to the
Jal’qa people and offers a rich selection of scenery, activities and intriguing
options for getting to know the Jal’qa culture.
Sights & Activities
The best way to see this region is on foot. A highly recommended three- or
four-day circuit taking in several Cordillera highlights and the villages at the
heart of the community tourism project begins at Chataquila, on the ridge
above Punilla, 35km northwest of Sucre. From here (with an optional side
trip to the abstract red, white and black man-animal rock paintings at
Incamachay and Pumamachay) you descend to Chaunaca, then head to the
Cráter de Maragua, before ending with the spectacular six- to seven-hour
walk – via chullpa (funerary towers) and with a short diversion to see the
dinosaur footprints at Niñu Mayu – to Potolo. At Potolo there is daily
transportation back to Sucre.
We strongly recommend taking a guide to increase your enjoyment of the
region and communicate with the Quechua-speaking campesinos. A
responsible guide will help you avoid local hostility, minimize your impact
and help you get a better feel for the local culture.
There are numerous walking routes through the Cordillera de los Frailes,
some of which are marked on the 1:50,000 topo sheets Sucre, sheet 6536IV,
and Estancia Chaunaca, sheet 6537III. You can get them at the Instituto
Geográfico Militar ( Click here ) in Sucre.
THE JAL’QA COMMUNITIES
The Cordillera de los Frailes is home to the Quechua-speaking Jal’qa people, of whom there are
some 10,000 in the area around Potolo and Maragua. They have traditionally made a living from
farming potatoes, wheat and barley, and herding sheep and goats. The weaving of elaborately
patterned aqsus (an apron-like skirt) is an important craft tradition and these Escher-like red-andblack garments are instantly recognizable, being patterned with inventive depictions of khurus –
strange, demon-like figures.
In 2001 the Jal’qa decided that they wanted to embrace tourism, but in a sustainable form that
would benefit the community without destroying its traditions. They have developed a series of
accommodations, cultural centers and guiding services, all involving maximal community
participation. The villages receive 100% of profits.
Accommodations and restaurant services have been set up in the villages of Maragua and
Potolo. Sets of attractive thatched cabañas have been constructed using traditional methods and
materials; they boast comfortable beds, hot water and attractive wooden furniture, and are
decorated with local textiles. The cost is B$60 per person per night; for B$100 per person, meals
and cultural displays are included. The villages also have good camping areas. In Chaunaca
there’s a camping area and some beds set up in the information center, but no restaurant service.
The villages are well placed for hiking.
On the way, you will eat traditional Bolivian campesino meals – such as kala purca, a maize
soup cooked by immersing hot stones in it. Cultural activities that can be organized include
demonstrations of pujllay dancing or traditional medicine. Weaving workshops can be found in
all the villages mentioned, as well as some others, while Chaunaca has an interpretation center
and Potolo a museum of indigenous healing. Note that the Jal’qa aren’t fond of being
photographed.
To book the Maragua cabañas, call 644-5341. For Potolo call 693-8204. Alternatively,
ask at the Museo de Arte Indígena ( Click here ) in Sucre.
CHATAQUILA TO CHAUNACA
On the rocky ridgetop at Chataquila is a lovely stone chapel dedicated to the
Virgen de Chataquila, a Virgin-shaped stone dressed in a gown and placed
on the altar. The chapel was built from the local rock and blends in
seamlessly with its surroundings.
From Chataquila look around on the south side of the road for an obvious
notch in the rock, which leads into a lovely pre-Hispanic route that descends
steeply for 6km (three hours) to the village of Chaunaca, 41km from Sucre.
Lots of good paved sections remain and it’s easy to follow.
Chaunaca is home to a school, a tiny church and an interpretation and
information center on the Jal’qa region. Beds are available in the information
center, but you’ll have to find your own food. There’s also a campsite and
the renovated colonial hacienda, Samay Huasi ( 645-4129; per person
B$300), which offers pricey but high-quality accommodation. The cost
includes three meals a day and transportation can be arranged for a small fee.
Slightly higher prices may apply if there are fewer than three people – ring
to check.
For a head start, camiones run the route from Sucre to Chaunaca and
Chataquila, departing from Av Juana Azurduy de Padilla. From Chaunaca
you have the option of continuing west 15km direct to Potolo, or taking the
very rewarding detour south via Maragua and Humaca. The latter will add
an extra day to your hike but takes in some sites of real geological and
paleontological interest.
INCAMACHAY & PUMAMACHAY
A worthwhile side trip from Chataquila or Chaunaca leads to two fascinating
sets of ancient rock paintings estimated to be up to 2000 years old. At the
first major curve on the road west of Chataquila, a rugged track heads north
along the ridge. For much of its length the route is flanked by rugged rock
formations, but it’s relatively easygoing until you’ve almost reached the
paintings, where you face a bit of a scramble. The first set, Pumamachay,
lies well ensconced inside a rock cleft between two stone slabs. The
pictographs here depict humans and geometric shapes in monochrome black.
A more impressive panel, Incamachay, is 15 minutes further along beneath a
rock overhang that contains anthropomorphic, zoomorphic and geometric
motifs painted in red and white. Guides at the entrance charge B$10. You
will need one to find the paintings.
From Incamachay, you can continue downhill for a couple of hours until
you hit the road at the Toma de Agua aqueduct, where there’s drinking
water and a good campsite. From there take the road 6km to the Chataquila–
Chaunaca road, where you can either ascend to Chataquila or descend to
Chaunaca from where you can find transportation back to Sucre.
CRÁTER DE MARAGUA
This unearthly natural formation, sometimes called the Ombligo de
Chuquisaca (Chuquisaca’s Belly Button), features surreal settlements
scattered across an 8km-wide red-and-violet crater floor, and bizarre slopes
that culminate in the gracefully symmetrical pale green arches of the
Serranías de Maragua. These scallop-shaped cliff faces make it one of the
most visually striking places in Bolivia. There’s plenty to see: waterfalls,
caves and a picturesque cemetery in the middle of the crater that dates from
pre-Hispanic times.
The village of Maragua is an active weaving center. The weavers have
set up a store and will take visitors into their homes to show them the
creation of the textiles. Maragua has three cabañas and a campsite. A
kilometer from the village, in Irupampa, the villagers started up a lovely
little hostel ( 693-8088; r per person B$25), with running water, a cold
shower next door and an appealing little garden. You can also camp here.
Maragua is an easy three-hour walk along the road from Chaunaca. If
you’d prefer a lift, ask about shared 4WD taxis at one of the Sucre tourist
agencies.
MARAGUA TO POTOLO
From Maragua, it’s a spectacular walk to Potolo. You can get there in five
hours, but there’s plenty to see on the way to slow you down. In the area
around Humaca you will find chullpa and a paleontological deposit where
embedded fossils are clearly visible in the rocks. Additionally, dinosaur
footprints at Niñu Mayu can be visited if you are prepared to add an extra
hour or so to your hike. All of these can be found most easily with a local
guide. Ask around in the villages and negotiate a price that is fair to the
community.
Another side trip from Humaca could take you to the Termas de Talula,
5km away. You’ll need to ford the Río Pilcomayo twice. The Talula hot
springs issue into rock pools that have temperatures up to 46°C. Camping is
possible anywhere in the vicinity.
From Talula it’s 500m to the constricted passage that conducts the Río
Pilcomayo between the steep walls of the Punkurani gorge. When the river is
low, you can cross over to the Potosí shore and see the many rock-painting
sites above the opposite bank.
POTOLO
The village of Potolo has some typically stunning weaving going on in the
workshops and also has a museum of traditional medicine, which
demonstrates vernacular healing practices and other aspects of the culture.
There are three cabañas here, a store and a campsite.
Camiones run infrequently to Potolo from Av Juana Azurduy de Padilla in
Sucre via Chaunaca and Chataquila. They return to Sucre from Potolo when
full.
QUILA QUILA
Another worthwhile destination is the beautiful village of Quila Quila, three
hours south of Maragua by foot. It’s a formerly deserted village of largely
mud buildings that is being slowly repopulated. The tower of the elegant
colonial church dominates the skyline and adjacent to it are buried the
remains of the revered 18th-century indigenous leader Tomás Katari, who
was murdered at the chapel in Chataquila in 1781. In 1777 Katari walked to
Buenos Aires to confront colonial leaders and claim rights for the Aymará
and returned triumphantly with a document signed by the viceroy ceding to
his demands and recognizing him as cacique (chieftain). Upon his return to
Bolivia he was imprisoned, sparking a widespread uprising that eventually
led to his death. A kilometer away are the Marca Runi monoliths with
pictographs. The area is rich in pre-Columbian archaeological artifacts.
Daily camiones to Talula via Quila Quila (B$8, three to four hours) depart
at 6:30am from Calle Osvaldo Molina in Sucre, returning the afternoon of
the same day. Alternatively negotiate with a taxi driver. In recent times some
visitors have reported an unpleasant reception by villagers and it is strongly
recommended that you check the current situation before setting out or, even
better, go with a guide.
Tours
To get the most out of the region it is essential to visit with a guide. Several
Sucre travel agencies offer quick jaunts into the Cordillera – for example, a
two-day circuit from Chataquila to Incamachay and Chaunaca. It’s important
to go with a responsible operator committed to giving something to the
region. Exploitative day trips have created an atmosphere of hostility
towards visitors in some communities and it is up to you to ensure that your
visit does not exacerbate the problem.
Private guides can usually be arranged through the tourist offices in Sucre
or one of the agencies, but if possible pick one that is local, has links to the
communities and gives something back to them. Avoid guides who do not
spend money locally or bring all their supplies from Sucre. Local guide
Pablo Ávila-Cruz ( 7-711-4517; from B$200 per day) knows the region
like the back of his hand and comes highly recommended. He can be
contacted through the Oficina Universitaria de Turismo ( Click here ) in
Sucre.
POTOSÍ
 2 / POP 145,000 / ELEV 4070M
   I am rich Potosí,
   The treasure of the world…
   And the envy of kings.
The conquistadors never found El Dorado, the legendary city of gold, but
they did get their hands on Potosí and its Cerro Rico, a ‘Rich Hill’ full of
silver. This quote, from the city’s first coat of arms, sums it up. The city was
founded in 1545 as soon as the ore was discovered and pretty soon the silver
extracted here was bankrolling the Spanish empire. Even today, something
very lucrative is said to vale un Potosí (be worth a Potosí).
Potosí’s story is wholly tied to its silver. During the boom years, when the
metal must have seemed inexhaustible, it became the largest and wealthiest
city of the Americas. Once the silver more or less dried up, however, the city
went into decline and its citizens slipped into poverty. The ore is still being
extracted by miners in some of the most abysmal conditions imaginable – a
visit to see today’s miners at work provokes disbelief at just how appalling
the job is. But the rest of Potosí – its grand churches, ornate colonial
architecture and down-to-earth, friendly inhabitants – is a real delight.
D3
B4
P
o
t
o
s
í
 Top Sights
Casa Nacional de la Moneda
Museo & Convento de Santa Teresa
B4
D1
E3
D4
D4
D1
E4
C2
B1
D5
D3
D3
(see 53)
D4
C4
D2
F3
C4
E4
E4
D3
(see 3)
C4
E3
B1
E3
D5
B1
B4
D5
B3
C1
C1
A1
 Sights 1 Arcos de Cobija 2 Calle Quijarro 3 Casa de las Tres Portadas 4 Cathedral 5 El Cabildo 6 Esquina de las Cuatro Portadas 7 Iglesia de la Merced 8 Iglesia de San Lorenzo de Carangas 9 La Capilla de Nuestra Señora de Jerusalén
10 Museo & Convento de San Francisco 11 Pasaje de Siete Vueltas
12 Portón Mestizo Torre de la Compañía de Jesús
 Activities, Courses & Tours
13 Altiplano Tours
14 Big Deal Tours
15 Greengo Tours
16 Hidalgo Tours
17 Sin Fronteras
 Sleeping
18 Hostal Carlos V Imperial
19 Hostal Colonial
20 Hostal Felimar
Hostal Las Tres Portadas
21 Hostal María Victoria
22 Hostal Patrimonio
23 Hostal San José
24 Hotel Coloso Potosí
25 Hotel El Turista
26 Hotel Jerusalén
27 Hotel Santa Teresa
28 La Casona Hostal
29 Macuquina Dora Hotel
30 Residencial 10 de Noviembre
31 Residencial Felcar
32 Residencial Sumaj
 Eating
E4
E4
(see 7)
D4
D3
E5
E3
C4
D4
C3
C2
C3
E2
C4
C3
D3
E3
E5
E3
E3
(see 13)
B2
C4
D3
D3
33 4060
34 Café Cultural Kaypichu
Café de la Merced
35 Café la Plata
36 Chaplin Café
37 Cherry’s Salon de Té
38 Confitería Capricornio
39 El Fogón
40 El Mesón
41 Malpartida
42 Manzana Mágica
43 Market
44 Phishqa Warmis
45 Pizzeria El Maná
 Drinking
46 La Casona Pub
47 Sumaj Orcko
 Entertainment
48 Cine Universitario
49 Multicine Universal
 Shopping
50 Arte Nativo
 Information
51 Banco de Crédito
Café Internet Candelaria
52 Ex-Hotel del IV Centenario
53 Infotur
54 Janus Limpieza
55 Prodem
History
No one is certain how much silver has been extracted from Cerro Rico over
its four centuries of productivity, but a popular boast was that the Spanish
could have constructed a silver bridge to Spain and still had silver left to
carry across it. The Spanish monarchy, mortgaged to the hilt by foreign
bankers, came to rely completely on the yearly treasure fleets, which brought
the Potosí silver. On the rare occasions when they were intercepted by
storms or pirates, it was a national disaster.
Although the tale of Potosí’s origins probably takes a few liberties with
the facts, it’s a good story. It begins in 1544 when a local Inca, Diego
Huallpa, searching for an escaped llama, stopped to build a fire at the foot of
the mountain known in Quechua as ‘Potojsi’ (meaning ‘thunder’ or
‘explosion’, although it might also have stemmed from potoj, ‘the springs’).
The fire grew so hot that the very earth beneath it started to melt and shiny
liquid oozed from the ground.
Diego immediately realized he had run across a commodity for which the
Spanish conquerors had an insatiable appetite. Perhaps he also remembered
the Inca legend associated with the mountain, in which Inca Huayna Capac
had been instructed by a booming voice not to dig in the hill of Potojsi, but
to leave the metal alone, because it was intended for others.
Whatever the truth of this, the Spanish eventually learned of the enormous
wealth buried in the mountain of Potojsi and determined that it warranted
immediate attention. On April 1, 1545, the Villa Imperial de Carlos V was
founded at the foot of Cerro Rico and large-scale excavation began. In the
time it takes to say ‘Get down there and dig,’ thousands of indigenous slaves
were pressed into service and the first of the silver was already headed for
Spain.
The work was dangerous, however, and so many workers died of
accidents and silicosis pneumonia that the Spanish imported millions of
African slaves to augment the labor force. The descendants of the very few
to survive mainly live in the Yungas.
In order to increase productivity, in 1572 the Viceroy of Toledo instituted
the Ley de la Mita, which required all indigenous and African slaves over the
age of 18 to work shifts of 12 hours. They would remain underground
without seeing daylight for four months at a time, eating, sleeping and
working in the mines. When they emerged from a ‘shift’, their eyes were
covered to prevent damage from the bright sunlight.
Naturally these miners, who came to be known as mitayos, didn’t last
long. Heavy losses were also incurred among those who worked in the
ingenios (smelting mills), as the silver-smelting process involved contact
MUSEUM
with deadly mercury. In all, it’s estimated that over the three centuries of
colonial rule (1545 to 1825) as many as eight million Africans and
indigenous Bolivians died in these appalling conditions.
In 1672 a mint was established to coin the silver, reservoirs were
constructed to provide water for the growing population and exotic European
consumer goods found their way up the llama trails from Arica and Callao.
Amid the mania, more than 80 churches were constructed and Potosí’s
population grew to nearly 200,000, making it one of the largest cities in the
world. As one politician of the period put it: ‘Potosí was raised in the
pandemonium of greed, at the foot of riches discovered by accident.’
As with most boom towns, Potosí’s glory was not to last. The mines’
output began to decline in the early 19th century and the city was looted
during the independence struggles in Alto Perú. The population dropped to
less than 10,000 and the mid-19th-century drop in silver prices dealt a blow
from which Potosí has never completely recovered.
In the present century only the demand for tin has rescued Potosí from
obscurity and brought a slow but steady recovery. Zinc and lead have now
taken over from tin as Bolivia’s major metallic exports but silver extraction
continues on a small scale and reminders of the city’s grand colonial past are
still evident.
Most of the operations in Cerro Rico today are in the control of minerowned cooperatives, which operate under conditions that have changed
shamefully little from the colonial period. There’s little prospect of change in
sight, as the miners barely extract enough ore to keep themselves in bread.
The dream of the lucky strike (there are still a few) keeps them going,
although the number of miners is steadily dwindling.
Sights
In 1987 Unesco named Potosí a World Heritage Site in recognition of its rich
and tragic history and its wealth of colonial architecture.
Casa Nacional de la Moneda
Offline map Google map
(Ayacucho at Bustillos; admission by mandatory 2hr guided tour B$40,
camera B$20; 9am, 10:30am, 2:30pm & 4:30pm Tue-Sat, 9am &
MINES
10:30am Sun) The National Mint is Potosí’s star attraction and one of South
America’s finest museums. Potosí’s first mint was constructed on the present
site of the Casa de Justicia in 1572 under orders from the Viceroy of Toledo.
This, its replacement, is a vast and strikingly beautiful building that takes up
a whole city block. It was built between 1753 and 1773 to control the
minting of colonial coins; legend has it that when the king of Spain saw the
bill for its construction, he exclaimed ‘that building must be made of silver’
(expletive presumably deleted). These coins, which bore the mint mark ‘P,’
were known as potosís.
The building has walls that are more than a meter thick and it has not only
functioned as a mint but also done spells as a prison, a fortress and, during
the Chaco War, the headquarters of the Bolivian army. As visitors are
ushered into a courtyard from the entrance, they’re greeted by the sight of a
stone fountain and a freaky mask of Bacchus, hung there in 1865 by
Frenchman Eugenio Martin Moulon for reasons known only to him. In fact,
this aberration looks more like an escapee from a children’s funfair, but it
has become a town icon (known as the mascarón).
Apart from the beauty of the building itself, there’s a host of historical
treasures. They include a fine selection of religious paintings from the Potosí
school, culminating in La Virgen del Cerro, a famous anonymous work from
the 18th century, as well as the immense assemblies of mule-driven wooden
cogs that served to beat the silver to the width required for the coining.
These were replaced by steam-powered machines in the 19th century. The
last coins were minted here in 1953.
The guided tour is long and the temperatures inside the building are chilly,
so rug up. Although there are English and French tours available on request,
the quality of the Spanish one is higher and the visit more comprehensive, so
it’s worth doing even if your levels are fairly limited.
Cooperative Mines
A visit to the cooperative mines will almost certainly be one of the most
memorable experiences you’ll have in Bolivia, providing an opportunity to
witness working conditions that are among the most grueling imaginable.
We urge you not to underestimate the dangers involved in going into the
mines and to consider the voyeuristic factor involved in seeing other
people’s suffering. You may be left stunned and/or ill.
Dozens of Potosí operators offer guided tours through the mines. The best
tour guides tend to be ex-miners, who know the conditions and are friendly
with the men at work. The safety standards are hit-and-miss; you really are
going down at your own risk.
Mine visits aren’t easy and the low ceilings and steep, muddy
passageways are best visited in your worst clothes. You’ll feel both cold and
hot at times, there will likely be a bit of crawling through narrow shafts and
the altitude can be extremely taxing. On some tours, you’ll end up walking
3km or 4km inside the mountain. You’ll be exposed to noxious chemicals
and gases, including silica dust (the cause of silicosis), arsenic gas and
acetylene vapors, as well as asbestos deposits. Anyone with doubts or
medical problems should avoid these tours. The plus side is that you can
speak with the friendly miners, who will share their insights and opinions
about their difficult lot. The miners are proud of their work in such tough
conditions and generally happy for visitors to observe their toil.
Tours begin with a visit to the miners’ market, where miners stock up on
acetylene rocks, dynamite, cigarettes and other essentials. In the past, gifts
weren’t expected, but with the growing number of tourists, you’d be very
unpopular if you didn’t supply a handful of coca leaves and a few cigarettes
– luxuries for which the miners’ meager earnings are scarcely sufficient.
Photography is permitted. Avoid taking plastic bags into the mine;
accumulation of garbage is a growing problem.
The tours then generally visit an ingenio, before heading up to Cerro Rico
itself. Note that since January 2011 it is now illegal for tour companies to
give demonstrations of dynamite explosions, which destabilise the mountain
and potentially threaten lives. Some companies continue to flout these
regulations, however. Ask your tour company vendor if a dynamite
explosion is included. If they say yes, choose another operator. It is unlikely
to be the only corner they are cutting.
Tours run in the morning or afternoon and last from four to five hours.
The standard charge is between B$100 and B$150 per person; slightly lower
rates may be available during the low season. This price includes a guide,
transportation from town and equipment (jacket, helmet, boots and lamp).
Note the claim that ‘15% of profits donated to miners’ is a well-known
marketing scam; all companies pay the same fee for entry into the mines and
it is considerably less than 15%. If you want to help the miners, choose a
company run by miners. Wear sturdy clothing, carry plenty of water and
HISTORICAL BUILDING
MUSEUM
have a handkerchief/headscarf handy to filter some of the noxious
substances you’ll encounter. There is less activity in the mines on Sundays.
For more information about entering the mines, see boxed texts on Click
here and Click here .
Los Ingenios
On the banks of the Río Huana Mayu, in the upper Potosí barrios of
Cantumarca and San Antonio, are some fine ruined examples of the
ingenios. These were formerly used to extract silver from the ore hauled out
of Cerro Rico. There were originally 82 ingenios along 15km of the stream.
Some remaining ones date back to the 1570s and were in use until the mid1800s. Most tours of the Cerro Rico mines include a stop at a working
ingenio as part of the trip.
Each ingenio consists of a floor penetrated by shallow wells (buitrones)
where the ore was mixed with mercury and salt. The ore was then ground by
millstones that were powered by water that was impounded in the 32
artificial Lagunas de Kari Kari.
Museo & Convento de Santa Teresa
Offline map Google map
(cnr Santa Teresa & Ayacucho; admission by guided tour B$21, photo
permit B$10; 9am-12:30pm & 2:30-6:30pm Mon-Sat, 9am-11am & 3-
5pm Sun, last tours 11am & 5pm Mon-Sat) The fascinating Santa Teresa
Convent was founded in 1685 and is still home to a small community of
Carmelite nuns. One of them is an architect and has directed a superb
restoration project that has converted part of the sizable building into a
museum.
The excellent guided tour (in Spanish and English) explains how girls of
15 from wealthy families entered the convent, getting their last glimpse of
parents and loved ones at the door. Entry was a privilege, paid for with a
sizable dowry; a good portion of these offerings are on display in the form of
religious artwork.
There are numerous fine pieces, including a superb Madonna by Castilian
sculptor Alonso Cano, several canvases by Melchor Pérez de Holguín,
Bolivia’s most famous painter, and a room of painted wooden Christs. Some
of the artworks verge on the macabre, as does the skull sitting in a bowl of
MUSEUM
CHURCH
dust in the middle of the dining room and a display of wire whisks that some
of the nuns used for self-flagellation.
The building itself is as impressive as the works of art on show, with two
pretty cloisters housing numerous cacti and a venerable apple tree. It
provides a glimpse into a cloistered world that only really changed character
in the 1960s, with the reforms of the Second Vatican Council.
The guided tour lasts almost two hours; note that some of the rooms are
particularly chilly. There’s also a cafe and store, where you can buy almond
and peanut sweets made by the nuns.
Museo & Convento de San Francisco
Offline map Google map
(cnr Tarija & Nogales; admission B$15; 9am-noon & 2:30-6pm Mon-Fri,
9am-noon Sat) The San Francisco Convent was founded in 1547 by Fray
Gaspar de Valverde, making it the oldest monastery in Bolivia. Owing to its
inadequate size, it was demolished in 1707 and reconstructed over the
following 19 years. A gold-covered altar from this building is now housed in
the Casa Nacional de la Moneda. The statue of Christ that graces the present
altar features hair that is said to grow miraculously.
The museum has examples of religious art, including various paintings
from the Potosí school, such as The Erection of the Cross by Melchor Pérez
de Holguín, various mid-19th-century works by Juan de la Cruz Tapia and
25 scenes from the life of St Francis of Assisi.
The highlight of the obligatory tour (ask for an English-speaking guide),
which has no real schedule and lasts about 1½ hours, comes at the end, when
you’re ushered up the tower and onto the roof for a grand view of Potosí.
You also visit the catacombs, which have a smattering of human bones and a
subterranean river running nearby.
Torre de la Compañía de Jesús
Offline map Google map
(Ayacucho nr Bustillos; mirador admission B$10; 8-11:30am & 2-5:30pm
Mon-Fri, 8am-noon Sat) The ornate and beautiful bell tower, on what
remains of the former Jesuit church, was completed in 1707 after the
CHURCH
collapse of the original church. Both the tower and the doorway are adorned
with examples of mestizo baroque ornamentation.
Cathedral
Offline map Google map
(Plaza 10 de Noviembre) Construction of Potosí’s cathedral was initiated in
1564 and finally completed around 1600. The original building lasted until
the early 19th century, when it mostly collapsed. Most of what is now visible
is the neoclassical construction and the building’s elegant lines represent one
of Bolivia’s best exemplars of that style. The interior decor represents some
of the finest in Potosí. You can visit the bell tower (admission B$10;
8am-noon & 2-6pm Mon-Fri) for nice views of the city.
THE JOB FROM HELL
In the cooperative mines on Cerro Rico, all work is done with mostly primitive tools and
underground temperatures vary from below freezing – the altitude is more than 4200m – to a
stifling 115°F on the 4th and 5th levels. Miners, exposed to all sorts of noxious chemicals and
gases, normally die of silicosis pneumonia within 10 to 15 years of entering the mines.
Women are admitted to many cooperative mines but only five are allowed to be in the mine’s
interior at any one time. That’s because quite a few miners hang on to the tradition that women
underground invite bad luck and, in many cases, the taboo applies only to miners’ wives, whose
presence in the mines would invite jealousy from Pachamama (Mother Earth). At any rate, lots of
Quechua women are consigned to stay right outside the mines picking through the tailings,
gleaning small amounts of minerals that may have been missed.
Since cooperative mines are owned by the miners themselves, they must produce the goods in
order to scrape a living. The majority of the work is done by hand with explosives and tools they
must purchase themselves, including the acetylene lamps used to detect pockets of deadly carbon
monoxide gas.
Miners prepare for their workday by socializing and chewing coca for several hours, beginning
work at about 10am. They work until lunch at 2pm, when they rest and chew more coca. For
those who don’t spend the night working, the day usually ends at 7pm. On the weekend, each
miner (or a group of miners) sells his week’s production to the buyer for as high a price as he can
negotiate.
When miners first enter the mine, they offer propitiation at the shrine of the miners’ god Tata
Kaj’chu, whom they hope will afford them protection in the harsh underground world. Deeper in
the mine, visitors will undoubtedly see a devilish figure occupying a small niche somewhere
along the passageways. As most of the miners believe in a god in heaven, they deduce that there
must also be a devil beneath the earth in a place where it’s hot and uncomfortable. Since hell
CHURCH
CHURCH
CHURCH
(according to the traditional description of the place) must not be far from the environment in
which they work, they reason that the devil himself must own the minerals they’re dynamiting
and digging out of the earth. In order to appease this character, whom they call Tío (Uncle) or
Supay – never Diablo – they set up a little ceramic figurine in a place of honor.
On Friday nights a cha’lla (offering) is made to invoke his goodwill and protection. A little
alcohol is poured on the ground before the statue, lighted cigarettes are placed in his mouth and
coca leaves are laid out within easy reach. Once formalities have been dispensed with, the miners
smoke, chew coca and proceed to drink themselves unconscious. While this is all taken very
seriously, it also provides a bit of diversion from an extremely harsh existence. It’s interesting
that offerings to Jesus Christ are only made at the point where the miners can first see the outside
daylight.
In most cooperative operations there is a minimal medical plan in case of accidents or silicosis
(which is inevitable after seven to 10 years working underground) and a pension of about US$15
a month for those so incapacitated. Once a miner has lost 50% of his lung capacity to silicosis, he
may retire, if he so wishes. In case of death, a miner’s widow and children collect this pension.
La Capilla de Nuestra Señora deJerusalén
(Plaza del Estudiante; open for mass) La Capilla de Nuestra Señora de
Jerusalén is a little-known Potosí gem. Originally built as a humble chapel in
honor of the Virgen de Candelaria, it was rebuilt more lavishly in the 18th
century. It houses a fine gilt baroque retablo (portable boxes with depictions
of religious and historical events) – the Virgin has pride of place – and a
magnificent series of paintings of Biblical scenes by anonymous artists of
the Potosí school. The impressive pulpit has small paintings by Melchor
Pérez de Holguín.
Iglesia de San Lorenzo de Carangas
Offline map Google map
(cnr Héroes del Chaco & Bustillos; open for mass) The ornate mestizo
baroque portal of Iglesia de San Lorenzo de Carangas is probably one of the
most photographed subjects in Bolivia. It was carved in stone by master
indigenous artisans in the 16th century, but the main structure wasn’t
completed until the bell towers were added in 1744. Inside are two Melchor
Pérez de Holguín paintings and handcrafted silverwork on the altar. The
church was renovated in 1987.
Iglesia de la Merced
CHURCH
ARCHITECTURE
ARCHITECTURE
Offline map Google map
(cnr Hoyos & Millares; open for mass) Constructed between 1555 and
1687, the restored Iglesia de la Merced has a carved pulpit, a gorgeous
wooden ceiling and a beautiful 18th-century silver arch over the altarpiece.
Iglesia de San Martín
( 622-3682; cnr Hoyos & Almagro; admission B$10; 10am-noon & 3-
6pm Mon-Sat) The rather ordinary-looking Iglesia de San Martín was built
in the 1600s and is today run by the French Redemptionist Fathers. Inside is
an art museum, with at least 30 paintings beneath the choir depicting the
Virgin Mary and the 12 Apostles. The Virgin on the altarpiece wears
clothing woven from silver threads. San Martín is outside the center and is
sometimes closed, so phone before traipsing out here.
Historic Buildings
Potosí’s elaborate colonial architecture merits a stroll around the narrow
streets to take in the ornate doorways and facades, as well as the covered
wooden balconies that overhang the streets. Architecturally notable homes
and monuments include the mustard-colored El Cabildo Offline map
Google map (Town Hall; Plaza 10 de Noviembre), the pretty Casa de las Tres
Portadas Offline map Google map (Bolívar 1052) and the Arcos de Cobija
Offline map Google map (Arches of Cobija) on the street of the same name.
On Calle Junín, between Matos and Bolívar, is an especially lovely and
elaborate Portón Mestizo Offline map Google map (Junín), a doorway flanked
by twisted columns. It once graced the home of the Marqués de Otavi, but
now ushers patrons into the Banco Nacional.
Calle Quijarro
Offline map Google map
North of the Iglesia de San Agustín, Calle Qui- jarro narrows as it winds
between a wealth of colonial buildings, many with doorways graced by old
family crests. It’s thought that the bends in this street were an intentional
attempt to inhibit the cold winds that would otherwise whistle through and
chill everything in their path. This concept is carried to extremes on the
MINE TOUR, TINKU
Pasaje de Siete Vueltas Offline map Google map (Passage of Seven Turns),
which is an extension of Calle Ingavi, east of Junín. During colonial times
Quijarro was the street of potters, but it’s now known for its hat makers. The
intersection of Quijarro and Modesto Omiste, further north, has been dubbed
the Esquina de las Cuatro Portadas Offline map Google map because of its
four colonial doorways.
WARNING!
The cooperatives are not museums but working mines that are fairly nightmarish places. Anyone
planning to take a tour needs to realize that there are risks involved. People with medical
problems – especially claustrophobia, asthma and other respiratory conditions – should avoid
them. While medical experts including the NHS note that limited exposure from a tour lasting a
few hours is extremely unlikely to cause any lasting health impacts, if you have any concerns
whatsoever about exposure to asbestos or silica dust, you should not enter the mines. Accidents
can also happen – explosions, falling rocks, runaway trolleys etc. For these reasons, all tour
companies make visitors sign a disclaimer absolving them completely from any responsibility for
injury, illness or death. If your tour operator does not, choose another. Visiting the mines is a
serious decision. If you’re undeterred, you’ll have an eye-opening and unforgettable experience.
Tours
In addition to mine tours, there are a variety of guided tours offered by the
huge number of local agencies, including a three-hour city tour (B$70 to
B$100, not including entry fees) of the museums and monuments. Other
popular options include Tarapaya (B$50 to B$100); guided trekking trips
around the Lagunas de Kari Kari (B$160 to B$280); and tours of colonial
haciendas around Potosí (B$150). Agencies, offering all of these, include the
following:
Altiplano Tours
Offline map Google map
( 622-5353; Ayacucho 19) At the end of its mine tours, you can try some
of the work yourself. This company also offers tinku excursions.
MINE TOUR
MINE TOUR
TOUR
TOUR
SPIRITUAL
Big Deal Tours
Offline map Google map
( 623-0478; www.bigdealtours.blogspot.com; Bus- tillos 1092) A new
company specializing in mine tours run by current and ex-miners. One of the
best ways to make sure your visit has a positive impact.
Greengo Tours
Offline map Google map
( 623-1362; www.greengotours.com.bo; Junín) This agency has been
getting good reader reviews for its responsible mine tours and has a small
cafe in its office. The passionate owner, ex-miner Julio Zambrana, is actively
fighting to improve conditions for miners.
Hidalgo Tours
Offline map Google map
( 622-9512; www.salardeuyuni.net; cnr La Paz & Matos) One of the better
upmarket options.
Sin Fronteras
Offline map Google map
( 622-4058; Bustillos) Not really designed for walk-ins, these are mostly
private tours that are pricier but of a higher quality. Worth booking in
advance.
Festivals & Events
Fiesta del Espíritu
Potosí’s most unusual event happens on the last three Saturdays of June and
the first Saturday of August. It’s dedicated to Pachamama (Mother Earth),
whom the miners regard as the mother of all bolivianos.
Campesinos bring their finest llamas to the base of Cerro Rico to sell to
the miners for sacrifice. The ritual is conducted to a meticulous schedule. At
10am one miner from each mine purchases a llama and their families gather
for the celebrations. At 11am everyone moves to the entrance of their
TRADITIONAL
RELIGIOUS
respective mine. The miners chew coca and drink alcohol from 11am until
precisely 11:45am, when they prepare the llama for Pachamama by tying its
feet and offering it coca and alcohol. At noon the llama meets its maker. As
its throat is slit, the miners petition Pachamama for luck, protection and an
abundance of minerals. The blood of the llama is splashed around the mouth
of the mine to ensure Pachamama’s attention, cooperation and blessing.
For the next three hours the men chew coca and drink while the women
prepare a plate of grilled llama. The meat is served traditionally with
potatoes baked along with habas (fava beans) in a small adobe oven. When
the oven reaches the right temperature, it is smashed in on the food, which is
baked beneath the hot shards. The stomach, feet and head of the llama are
buried in a 3m hole as a further offering to Pachamama, then the music and
dancing begin. In the evening, celebrants are taken home in transportation
provided by the miner who bought his mine’s llama.
Fiesta de San Bartolomé (Chu’tillos)
This rollicking celebration takes place on the final weekend of August or the
first weekend of September and is marked by processions, student
exhibitions, traditional costumes and folk dancing from all over the
continent. In recent years it has even extended overseas and featured musical
groups and dance troupes from as far away as China and the USA. Given all
the practicing during the week leading up to the festival, you’d be forgiven
for assuming it actually started a week earlier. Booking accommodations for
this period is essential.
Exaltación de la Santa Vera Cruz
This festival, which falls on September 14, honors Santo Cristo de la Vera
Cruz. Activities occur around the Iglesia de San Lorenzo Carangas and the
railway station. Silver cutlery features prominently, as do parades, dueling
brass bands, dancing, costumed children and, of course, lots of alcohol.
Sleeping
If you are arriving in Potosí from Sucre you’ll doubtless be pretty
disappointed by what you get for your money in terms of accommodations.
It gets very cold in winter so choose where you stay carefully. Usually only
HOTEL
HOTEL
HOTEL
HOSTAL
the top-end hotels have heating and they sometimes need to be persuaded to
use it, despite what they tell you when they are trying to sell you a room.
There may be blanket shortages in the cheapies, so you’ll want a sleeping
bag.
Hostal Carlos V Imperial $
Offline map Google map
( 623-1010; Linares 42; d/ste B$180/B$200, s/d without bathroom
B$70/140) In terms of value for money this is about your best bet in town,
though the rooms with shared bathroom are a little cramped. The same can’t
be said for en suite rooms though, and the extra is money well spent.
Tastefully decorated, professionally run and with a bargain suite the match
of any hotel in a higher price range, you can’t go wrong.
Hotel Cima Argentum $$
( 622-9538; www.hca-potosi.com; Villazón 239; s/d B$310/350, ste
B$440-470; ) This well-run place with a light-flooded patio is a
handsome, slightly stuffy choice with decent facilities, including safes and
minibars in every room and off-street parking. The suites are a good choice
for families and all the rooms have good bathrooms, heating and wi-fi. The
international restaurant offers room service.
Hotel Coloso Potosí $$$
Offline map Google map
( 622-2627; www.potosihotel.com; Bolívar 965; s/d/tr B$530/670/920, ste
B$707-884; ) Potosí’s latest five-star option, it has all the perks of a
luxury hotel – spick-and-span rooms with minibars, heating and wi-fi – but
suffers from a stuffy formal atmosphere. There’s a pool, a restaurant, a sauna
and room service. Some rooms come with great city views.
Hostal María Victoria $
Offline map Google map
( 622-2132; Chuquisaca 148; s/d B$70/90, without bathroom B$40/70)
This attractive hostel occupies an old colonial home at the end of a quiet
lane. The rooms surround a classic whitewashed and tree-shaded courtyard;
PENSION
HOTEL
HOTEL
HOTEL
there’s also a roof terrace with views. A small breakfast is included and
there’s a tour agency on site. Note there’s an eight-minute shower limit.
Hostal San José $$
Offline map Google map
( 622-4394; Oruro 171; s/d B$90/180, without bathroom B$70/140) This
cheap place has a cheery welcome and decent location; a 3rd floor was going
up at research time. Ground-floor rooms are pokey with low ceilings so it’s
worth paying the extra for a better room, which will give you more warmth,
an electric socket and a bigger bed with a less lumpy mattress.
Hostal Colonial $$
Offline map Google map
( 622-4265; www.hostalcolonialpotosi.com; Ho- yos 8; s/d/tr
B$280/360/400; ) In a well-kept colonial building near the main plaza, this
warm whitewashed retreat has smallish rooms with windows onto a central
courtyard; all have minibars and cable TV, and some have bathtubs. It’s a
longstanding favorite with midrange travelers and boasts very helpful
English-speaking staff and a great location.
Hotel Santa Teresa $$
Offline map Google map
( 622-5270; www.hotelsantateresa.com.bo; Ayacucho 43; s/d/tr
B$220/380/480; ) This well-appointed hotel is by the convent of the same
name, in a quiet part of central Potosí. It has smallish but pleasant, and
occasionally overly green, rooms; the upstairs units have more light. The
courtyard restaurant, Rosicler, is one of the city’s best. It’s a somewhat
formal dining experience that can be enjoyed in your room with less fuss.
Hostal Las Tres Portadas $
Offline map Google map
( 622-8919; www.tresportadas.com; Bolívar 1092; s/d/t/ste
B$90/150/200/300, s without bathroom B$70; ) Situated in one of Potosí’s
most characterful buildings ( Click here ) and based around two pretty
patios, this blue-colored hotel is well run and adequately heated. New
HOSTEL
HOTEL
HOTEL
HOSTEL
owners have added a nice touch, decorating the courtyards like little town
plazas and naming them after important historic figures, and more
importantly they have cut the price substantially for an improved level of
service. Note that a name change may soon be on the cards.
Hostal Patrimonio $$
Offline map Google map
( 622-2659; www.hostalpatrimonio.com; Matos 62; s B$294, d B$420-
460) Fairly standard hotel with rooms opening on to a central atrium. That
said, the friendly service and reliable hot water make up for the lack of
character and it is better than most options in this price range in Potosí.
Avoid the rooms at the front, especially on weekends, as it is opposite a
disco.
Hotel Jerusalén $$
Offline map Google map
( 622-4633; Oruro 143; s/d/tr B$150/250/330; ) Popular with visiting
groups, this vast hotel is a dependable choice. Nobody would really claim
that it’s great value for money, but comfort counts; the staff can arrange all
sorts of tours and the rooms have quality gas showers and cable TV. There’s
a lively bar next door.
Macuquina Dora Hotel $$
Offline map Google map
( 623-0257; Camacho 243; s/d/tr B$160/260/340; ) A modern but
fading hotel in a handy central location. There’s cordial service and a bunch
of extras such as a sauna and gym, but the rooms with their frilly bedspreads
may have seen better days. Try to bag one of the front rooms (Nos 301 to
303); they have miles more light and space than the others.
Hostal Felimar $
Offline map Google map
( 622-4357; Junín 14; s/d/tr B$100/140/170, s/d without bathroom
B$60/90) This pleasant and centrally located hostel has some low-ceilinged
rooms and some nicer upstairs rooms with balconies affording views over
HOTEL
PENSION
PENSION
PENSION
the colonial street below. A small breakfast is included and there’s a great
suite on the top floor.
Hotel El Turista $$
Offline map Google map
( 622-2492; Lanza 19; s/d/tr B$140/240/330) The oldest functioning hotel
in town that, despite a makeover, still shows its age in places. Rooms are
spacious and fairly comfortable with creaky heating, electric showers, TVs
and superb views from the top floor. It’s fair value, with an airy feel, nice
wooden floors and a vibrantly colored patio.
Residencial 10 de Noviembre $
Offline map Google map
( 622-3253; Serrudo 181; d B$120, r per person without bathroom B$40)
In a tall white building, with fresh paint outside and in. Rooms are perfectly
decent, with impeccable shared bathrooms, reliable hot water and a pleasant
covered terrace.
Residencial Felcar $
Offline map Google map
( 622-4966; Serrudo 345; s/d B$70/140, without bathroom B$30/60) This
friendly place makes a sound choice with its clean, simple rooms (you’ll
want a sleeping bag in the cheaper ones). Newer rooms with bathrooms are
attractive, with typical Latin American furniture, TVs and heaters. There are
reliable hot showers throughout and a nice terrace. On Sunday, they offer a
traditional lunch of barbecued llama for B$25.
Residencial Sumaj $
Offline map Google map
( 622-3336; Gumiel 12; s/d/tr without bathroom B$45/80/120) This
longtime budget standby has small rooms with shared bathroom. It’s only
worth staying on the top floor, which is lit by skylights; those downstairs are
dreadfully dingy. There’s an adequate kitchen for guests, but you have to pay
B$15 per day for the privilege.
HOSTEL
SALTENERIA
PIZZA
La Casona Hostal $$
Offline map Google map
( 623-0523; www.hotelpotosi.com; Chuquisaca 460; s/d/tr/q
B$125/170/230/300, without bathroom B$65/90/135/180) An 18th-century
colonial house in the center of town, with rooms set around a yellow atrium
that is beginning to fall apart. It’s popular with backpackers but gets mixed
reviews and the state of the shared bathrooms is an issue. There’s also a
money exchange, a shared kitchen, a small cinema (B$3 per film) and some
internet terminals (B$2).
Eating
Though you don’t get the culinary diversity you may see in Sucre, there are
a few appealing restaurants in Potosí that are good spots to ward off the
nighttime chill with a hearty meal.
Stalls in the market (Oruro; 6am-7pm daily) comedor (dining hall)
serve inexpensive breakfasts of bread, pastries and coffee. Downstairs there
are some excellent juice stands. Cheese or meat empanadas are sold around
the market until early afternoon and in the evening, street vendors sell
humitas (cornmeal filled with cheese, onion, egg and spices, baked in the
oven or boiled).
Malpartida $
Offline map Google map
(Bolívar 644; salteñas B$5; morning only) Most Bolivians acknowledge,
when pushed, that Potosí does the best salteñas – juicy, spicy and oh-sotasty. In Potosí, if you ask around town where you can get the best salteñas
this is where you’ll be sent, presumably making it the best of the best.
Pizzeria El Maná $
Offline map Google map
(Bustillos 1080; almuerzo B$15, pizza B$14-26) You can’t beat this familystyle locals’ favorite right opposite Casa Nacional de la Moneda for its greatvalue lunches. This yellow-painted spot is simple both in decor and cuisine.
At night, it serves pizzas only.
INTERNATIONAL
FRENCH
INTERNATIONAL
LATIN AMERICAN
VEGETARIAN
Phishqa Warmis $$
Offline map Google map
(Sucre 56; meals B$20-50, almuerzo B$25) A pleasingly cozy little
restaurant lounge with colored walls and a vaulted ceiling. The pub-style à la
carte food gets mixed reviews, but the buffet almuerzo is better. Attentive
service and a refined but friendly atmosphere make it worth a try.
El Mesón $$
Offline map Google map
(cnr Tarija & Linares; mains B$28-50) The air at this vaulted restaurant on a
corner of the plaza is heavy with smells of warm garlic. The elaborate menu
is somewhat French, with food (steak, pasta, salads) that is a tad overpriced
but nonetheless excellent. The attractive ambience adds to the experience.
4060 $$$
Offline map Google map
(www.cafepub4060.com.bo; Hoyos 1; mains B$20-75; 4pm-midnight)
This spacious contemporary cafe-bar has earned plenty of plaudits for its
pizzas, burgers and Mexican food (and paella, if you order it in advance) as
well as being a sociable spot for a drink. There’s a good beer selection.
Doña Eugenia $$
(cnr Santa Cruz & Ortega; dishes B$10-40; 9.30am-12.30pm, closed
Wed) Potosí residents swear by this convivial local restaurant at the northern
end of town. Head there early (around 10am is best) to make sure you get
some of the legendary kala purca (thick maize soup with a hot rock in it).
Other specialties include a hearty fricasé (pork stew) only served on Sunday.
Manzana Mágica $
Offline map Google map
(Oruro 239; mains B$12-25; 8:30am-3pm & 5:30-10pm Mon-Sat; )
This is a worthwhile, strictly vegetarian spot known for its breakfast –
muesli, juice, eggs, brown bread and tasty soy steaks. The almuerzo (B$15)
INTERNATIONAL
INTERNATIONAL
CAFE
CAFE
FAST FOOD
is ultra-healthy and the generous portions of the à la carte dinners are
assertively spiced.
El Fogón $$$
Offline map Google map
(www.elfogon.com.bo; cnr Oruro & Frías; almuerzo B$25, mains B$22-70;
noon-11pm) This spacious, colorful and brightly lit central restaurant is
popular for its range of international and Bolivian food, including llama
steaks. In truth, though, it trades a bit on its past reputation – portions aren’t
huge and the service leaves much to be desired. Check out the English
translations on the menu!
Mirador de Pary Orcko $$
(Cerro Pary Orcko; mains B$20-45) At 4100m this is officially the world’s
highest revolving restaurant, offering a fabulous panorama of the city and
surrounding sierras. It takes 45 minutes to complete a single revolution, but
the view is better than the food.
Cherry’s Salon de Té $
Offline map Google map
(Padilla 8; mains B$9-22; 8am-10pm) This cafe makes a nice but very
slow pit stop while you’re out exploring the town. The apple strudel,
chocolate cake and lemon meringue pie are superb. It also offers light meals
and breakfasts.
Café de la Merced $
Offline map Google map
(Iglesia de la Merced; Hoyos s/n; light meals B$15; 11am-12:30pm & 2-
6pm) You couldn’t ask for a better location than this rooftop cafe: atop the
Iglesia de la Merced, right by the bells, with stellar city views. It serves very
tasty juices, acceptable coffee, delicious cakes and light meals; you may
have to wait for a table, though, as it’s a small space.
Confitería Capricornio $
VEGETARIAN
CAFE
CAFE
Offline map Google map
(Paseo Blvd 11; mains B$7-18; 9am-9pm) Packed with students in the
evening, this quick-bite eatery with a funky old-school vibe serves soup, fast
food, pizza, sandwiches, spaghetti, coffee and juices, all of which are cheap
as chips.
Café Cultural Kaypichu $
Offline map Google map
(Millares 14; mains B$12-35, breakfasts B$13-21; 7:30am-10pm TueSun; ) A peaceful and relaxed, mainly vegetarian, spot that is good at any
time of day, starting with healthy breakfasts (10 different varieties) and
heading through sandwiches to pasta and pizza dinners. It has regular
nighttime entertainment of folk music on weekends (admission B$10).
Café la Plata $$
Offline map Google map
(Plaza 10 de Noviembre; mains B$14-35; 10am-11pm Tue-Sat, 1:30-11pm
Mon) This handsome place is comfortable and chic in a restored sort of way,
and a good place to hang out. There are rich espressos, magazines to read
and wine served by the glass. Pastas, cakes, salads, sandwiches – it’s all
pretty tasty.
Chaplin Café $
Offline map Google map
(Matos cnr Quijarro; meals B$10-20; 7am-2pm) Friendly and
comfortable, this place serves mostly Bolivian fare with a few international,
including Mexican, dishes. It does decent breakfasts too.
TINKU – THE ART OF RITUAL MAYHEM
Native to the northern part of Potosí department, tinku (ritual fighting), which takes place on May
3, ranks as one of the few Bolivian traditions that has yet to be commercialized. This bizarre
practice lies deeply rooted in indigenous tradition and is thus often misunderstood by outsiders,
who can make little sense of the violent and often grisly spectacle.
Tinku may be best interpreted as a type of ritualized means of discharging tensions between
different indigenous communities. Festivities begin with singing and dancing, but participants
eventually drink themselves into a stupor. As a result, celebrations soon erupt into drunken
mayhem and frequently violence, as alcohol-charged emotions are unleashed in hostile
encounters.
A tinku usually lasts two or three days, when men and women in brightly colored traditional
dress hike in from surrounding communities. The hats worn by the men strongly resemble those
originally worn by the Spanish conquistadores, but are topped, Robin Hood–style, with one long
iridescent feather.
On the first evening, the communities parade through town to the accompaniment of
charangos and zampoñas (a type of pan pipe). Periodically, the revelers halt and form two
concentric circles, with women on the inside and the men in the outer circle. The women begin
singing a typically repetitious and cacophonous chant while the men run in a circle around them.
Suddenly, everyone stops and launches into a powerful stomping dance. Each group is headed by
at least one person – usually a man – who uses a whip to ensure slackers keep up with the rhythm
and the pace.
This routine may seem harmless enough, except that alcohol plays a significant and controlling
role. Most people carry bottles filled with puro (rubbing alcohol), which is the drink of choice, if
the intent is to quickly become totally plastered. By nightfall, each participating community
retreats to a designated house to drink chicha until they pass out.
This excessive imbibing inevitably results in social disorder and by the second day the drunk
participants can grow increasingly aggressive. Roaming the streets, individuals encounter people
from other communities with whom they may have some quarrel, either real or imagined, and
may challenge them to fight.
The situation rapidly progresses past yelling and cursing to pushing and shoving, before it
turns into an unusual – almost choreographed – form of warfare. Seemingly rhythmically, men
strike each other’s heads and upper bodies with extended arms. This has been immortalized in the
tinku dance, which is frequently performed during Carnaval in highly traditional Oruro. To
augment the hand-to-hand combat, the fighters may also throw rocks at their opponents,
occasionally causing serious injury or death. Any fatalities, however, are considered a blood
offering to Pachamama in lieu of a llama sacrifice for the same purpose.
The best known and arguably most violent tinku takes place in the village of Macha during the
first couple of weeks of May, while the villages of Ocurí and Toracarí, among others, also host
tinkus.
As you’d imagine, few foreigners aspire to witness this private and often violent tradition,
which categorically cannot be thought of as a tourist attraction; many people who have attended
insist they’d never do it again. For the terminally curious, however, Altiplano Tours in Potosí
conducts culturally sensitive – and patently less-than-comfortable – visits to several of the main
tinku festivities. Note, however, that if you do go it will be at your own risk. Keep a safe distance
from the participants and always remain on the side of the street to avoid being trapped in the
crowd. When walking around the village, maintain a low profile, speak in soft tones and ignore
any taunting cries of ‘gringo’. Also, bear in mind that these traditional people most definitely do
not want hordes of foreign tourists gawking at them and snapping photos; avoid photographing
individuals without their express permission and do not participate.
PUB
BAR
Drinking
The disco of choice for the Potosí youth right now is Mandarinas (Av
Murillo; admission B$20-30), which plays a mixture of salsa, kumbia and
reggaeton. Alternatively try Quilla (Av Murillo; admission B$15), on the
same road, which is aimed squarely at a local crowd.
La Casona Pub
Offline map Google map
(Frías 41; 6pm-midnight Mon-Sat) The atmospheric La Casona Pub is
tucked away in the historic 1775 home of the royal envoy sent to administer
the mint. It’s a memorable, friendly watering hole with pub grub. On Friday
it stages live music performances.
Sumaj Orcko
Offline map Google map
(Quijarro 46; 10am-10pm) A popular restaurant with a low-lit
comfortable bar on the corner for a quiet drink.
Entertainment
Ask around at the bars, cafes and restaurants for live music. Several
occasionally host acoustic peñas.
Potosí has two cinemas, the Multicine Universal Offline map Google map (
622-6133; Padilla 31) and the Cine Universitario Offline map Google map (
622-3049; Bolívar 893), which both screen relatively recent releases,
though the latter was undergoing repairs at the time of writing. They both
charge B$40 per screening.
Real Potosí, the local soccer team, is one of Bolivia’s most successful and
play at the town stadium on the hilariously named Calle Highland Players.
Shopping
Favored Potosí souvenirs include silver and tin articles available from stands
near the market entrance on Calle Oruro. Many of these were produced in
ARTS & CRAFTS
ARTS & CRAFTS
the village of Caiza, 80km south of Potosí, which now has its own co-op
store featuring naturally dyed wool items. Small dangly earrings, hoop
earrings, spoons and platters cost between B$10 and B$40.
Arte Nativo
Offline map Google map
(Sucre 30) Sells ecologically sound, indigenous handiwork, improving the
economic condition of rural women who weave with the naturally dyed wool
of sheep, llamas and alpacas.
Artesanías Palomita’s
(Museo Etno-Indumentario; Serrudo 148-152; 9am-noon & 2:30-6pm
Mon-Fri, 9am-noon Sat) Half shop, half museum and has costumes and
weavings from each of the 16 provinces of Potosí department.
Information
Emergency
Tourist police (Plaza 10 de Noviembre) Helpful; on the ground floor of the
Gobernación building. At the time of writing there was talk that the tourist
police may move to the ex-Hotel IV Centenario building on Plaza del
Estudiante.
Immigration
Migración ( 622-5989; Calama 188) For visa extensions.
Internet Access
There are numerous places to get online, mostly charging between B$3 and
B$4 per hour, including Café Internet Candelaria Offline map Google map
(Ayacucho 5), where the first 15 minutes is free with breakfast.
Laundry
Most hotels can organize laundry services for their guests. Failing that, try
Janus Limpieza Offline map Google map (Bolívar 773; per kg B$9; 8am-
8:30pm Mon-Sat).
Medical Services
If you need an English-speaking doctor, visit the Hospital Daniel
Bracamonte ( 624-4960; Italia s/n).
Money
ATMs are common in the center of town. Lots of businesses along Bolívar,
Sucre and in the market change US dollars at reasonable rates; stalls along
Héroes del Chaco also change euros and Chilean and Argentine pesos. Cash
advances are available at Banco de Crédito Offline map Google map (cnr
Bolívar & Sucre) and Prodem Offline map Google map (cnr Bolívar & Junín),
which also change US dollars.
Post & Telephone
The central post office (cnr Lanza & Chuquisaca; 8am-8pm Mon-Fri,
8am-5:30pm Sat, 9-11:30am Sun) is close to the main square. There are lots
of cheap international telecom centers.
Tourist Information
Potosi has an in-depth tourist information website, www.potosy.com.bo.
Instituto Geográfico Militar (Chayanta at 1 de Abril) Sells topographic
sheets of all areas of Potosí department.
Infotur ( 623-1021; Ayacucho nr Bustillos; 8am-noon & 2-6pm MonFri) Quite helpful and making a big effort to improve the standard of
Potosí’s services. At the time of writing there were unconfirmed rumors that
the office may move to the ex-Hotel del IV Centenario building on Plaza del
Estudiante.
Getting There & Away
Timetables and contact details for all transport operators can be found online
at www.potosy.com.bo.
Air
Potosí boasts the world’s highest commercial airport, Aeropuerto Capitán
Rojas. In the early 1990s the runway was extended to 4000m to
accommodate larger planes. At present, however, no scheduled services fly
in or out of Potosí and Sucre is the closest airport.
Bus & Shared Taxi
All road routes into Potosí are quite scenic and arriving by day will always
provide a dramatic introduction to the city. The new bus terminal is about
2km north of the center on Av Las Banderas and nearly all flotas (longdistance buses)now depart from here. Micros I or A run between the bus
terminal and the cathedral.
There are direct flotas to La Paz but in many cases it can be quicker to
look for a connection in Oruro. Similarly for Sucre shared taxis (B$50, two
hours) are pricier than the flotas, but are faster and more comfortable and
can pick you up at your hotel. Try Cielito Express ( 624-6040), Infinito (
624-5040) or Correcaminos ( 624-3383), but expect speed.
For Uyuni (B$40, six hours) buses depart irregularly from the old terminal
15 minutes downhill on foot from the center. The rugged route to Uyuni is
quite breathtaking.
DESTINATION COST (B$) DURATION (HR)
Cochabamba 52-120 15
La Paz 52-135 8
Oruro 30-40 6
Sucre 15-30 3
Tarija 60-70 12-15
Tupiza 60-100 7
Villazón 60-80 9
Getting Around
Micros and minibuses (B$1.30) shuttle between the center and the Cerro
Rico mines, as well as to the bus terminal. Taxis charge B$4 per person
around the center, slightly more at night, and B$10 to the bus terminal.
HACIENDA CAYARA
For a peaceful retreat or some comfortable hill walking, visit Hacienda Cayara ( 622-6380;
www.hotelmuseocayara.com.bo; lunch & dinner B$50, tea B$20; r per person B$180), which lies
25km down the valley northwest of Potosí. Set amid lovely hills at 3550m, this beautiful working
farm produces vegetables and milk for the city and as a place to stay is streets ahead of anywhere
in town. It dates back to colonial times and these days it’s owned by the English Aitken family,
who converted it into a hostel in 1992. The hacienda is part hotel and part museum: an opulent
colonial mansion furnished with original paintings and period furniture. Guests have use of the
fireplace and extensive library, which includes works dating from the 17th century.
Around Potosí
The Lagunas de Kari Kari are artificial lakes constructed in the late 16th
and early 17th centuries by 20,000 indigenous slaves to provide water for the
city and for hydropower to run the city’s 82 ingenios. Of the 32 original
lakes only 25 remain and all have been abandoned – except by waterfowl,
which appreciate the incongruous surface water in this otherwise stark
region.
The easiest way to visit Lagunas de Kari Kari is with a Potosí tour agency,
which charge about B$180 per person per day based on a group of three. If
you prefer to strike out on your own, carry food, water and warm clothing.
In a long day, you can have a good look around the lagunas and the fringes
of the Cordillera de Kari Kari, but it may also be rewarding to camp
overnight in the mountains. Access is fairly easy, with public transport from
Potosí. Inquire with one of the agencies in town and make sure you get a
good map of the area. The Cordillera de Kari Kari is included on the IGM
topo sheet Potosí (East) – sheet 6435.
Belief in the curative powers of Tarapaya (3600m), the most frequently
visited hot-springs area around Potosí, dates back to Inca times. It even
served as the holiday destination for Inca Huayna Capac, who would come
all the way from Cuzco (now in Peru) to bathe. The most interesting sight is
the 30°C Ojo del Inca, a perfectly round, green lake in a low volcanic crater,
100m in diameter. Along the river below the crater are several balnearios
(resorts) with medicinal thermal pools utilizing water from the lake, but be
aware that remolinos (whirlpools) make bathing here a hazardous affair.
Camiones leave for Tarapaya (B$4, 30 minutes) from Plaza Chuquimia near
the old bus terminal in Potosí roughly every half-hour from 7am to 7pm.
Taxis cost about B$50 one way. The last micro from Tarapaya back to Potosi
leaves between 5pm and 6pm.
Top of section
     Includes »
     Tarija
     San Jacinto Reservoir
     El Valle de la Concepción
     Padcaya & Chaguaya
     Reserva Biológica Cordillera de Sama
     Reserva Nacional de Flora y Fauna Tariquía
     Yacuiba
     Villamontes
     Parque Nacional y Área Natural de Manejo Integrado Aguaragüe
     Camiri
South Central Bolivia & the Chaco
Why Go?
Famed for its dances, wines and an almost Mediterranean character, the
isolated department of Tarija is a Bolivia that not many travelers know.
The culture here gravitates towards neighboring Argentina and dreams of
being closer to faraway Andalucía. The references to the region’s
resemblance to the south of Spain were started by Tarija’s founder, Luis de
Fuentes, who was seemingly anxious to lend a bit of home to a foreign land.
He thus named the river flowing past the city of Tarija the Guadalquivir
(after Andalucía’s biggest river), and left the chapacos – as tarijeños (Tarija
locals) are otherwise known – with a lilting dialect of European Spanish.
Tarija’s far eastern regions are full of petroleum-rich scrublands, backed
by stark highlands and the red earth of the Gran Chaco. This is where you’ll
find Bolivia’s hottest town, Villamontes, and a series of savage,
impenetrable reserves where wildlife abounds and few people dare to tread.
When to Go
Late Mar Rosillas goes cow crazy during the Fiesta de Leche y Queso.
Aug The coolest time of year to visit blistering Villamontes is during the
fishing festival.
Sep Honor the lepers in Tarija’s colorful Fiesta de San Roque, on the first
Sunday in September.
Best Places to Eat
»Pizza Pazza ( Click here )
»Taberna Gattopardo ( Click here )
»La Floresta ( Click here )
»Churrasquería El Rodeo ( Click here )
Best Places to Stay
»Resort Hotel Los Parrales ( Click here )
»Hostal del Sol ( Click here )
»Victoria Plaza Hotel ( Click here )
»Hotel El Rancho Olivo ( Click here )
»Residencial Gran Chaco ( Click here )
South Central Bolivia & the Chaco
Highlights
 Sample the world’s highest-grown wines in El Valle de la
Concepción ( Click here )
 Stroll around the colonial streets of tranquil Tarija ( Click here )
 Get revolutionary on the Che Trail ( Click here ) in Camiri
 Hike the fascinating Inca Trail ( Click here ) in the Reserva
Biológica Cordillera de Sama
 Discover spectacular Chaco wildlife in the region’s many parks
and reserves
 Get down and party Tarija-style at the Fiesta de San Roque (
Click here )
 Snack on some fresh fish in scorching Villamontes ( Click here )
History
Prior to the 1932–35 Chaco War, Bolivia had long claimed rights to the
Chaco, an inhospitable region beneath which rich oil fields were mooted to
lie. The disputed area of about 240,680 sq km stretched northeast of the
Paraguay and Pilcomayo Rivers in Paraguay, and included the 168,765 sq
km chunk of Argentina north of the Río Bermejo. With political turmoil in
Paraguay causing a distraction and economic hardship in Bolivia providing a
stimulus, the Bolivians saw their opportunity and began to slowly advance
into Paraguayan territory.
After losing the War of the Pacific in 1884, Bolivia was desperate to have
the Chaco as an outlet to the Atlantic via the Río Paraguay. Hoping that
physical possession would be interpreted as official sovereignty, the Bolivian
army set up a fort at Piquirenda on the Río Pilcomayo and then refused to
relinquish rights to Fuerte Vanguardia, its only port on the Paraguay river
(and not in Bolivian territory). In 1928 Paraguay responded by sending its
army to seize the fort. Although things got heated, both sides maintained a
conciliatory attitude, hoping that a peaceful solution might be possible.
Things, however, didn’t go as planned. During settlement talks in
Washington and under orders from Bolivian President Daniel Salamanca, the
Bolivian army tried to seize land without authorization, triggering full-scale
warfare. Bolivia was widely seen as the aggressor in diplomatic circles and
its case generated little support.
As the war progressed the Bolivians were driven back beyond their
existing borders, though they continued to fight, with their most successful
battle in the town of Villamontes in 1934. The hot, dry climate made access
to fresh water a decisive factor in the war, with capturing and keeping access
to wells a key strategy. Conditions were miserable, soldiers were illequipped and disease was rife. As a result, casualties on both sides were
heavy.
Though no decisive victory was reached in the war, both nations had
grown weary of fighting and peace negotiations held four years later
awarded most of the disputed territory to Paraguay. To date, no oil has ever
been found in the Chaco, though prospectors are still searching and
ironically the smaller area of Chaco awarded to the Bolivians harbors gas
reserves that have boosted the Bolivian economy and are the envy of the
Paraguayans on the other side of the border.
Climate
This is the area of Bolivia where you most feel the country’s proximity to the
equator and its distance from the sea. Tarija’s Mediterranean climate quickly
disappears as soon as you head downhill, where it is replaced by scorching
aridity and a merciless sun. The dry season in the region lasts from April to
November.
National Parks & Reserves
Remote, wild and off the beaten track, South Central Bolivia’s parks and
reserves are perfect for hardcore adventure seekers. Infrastructure is almost
nonexistent, but a visit to any of the reserves will make a lasting impression.
Those covered in this chapter include the Reserva Biológica Cordillera de
Sama, Reserva Nacional de Flora y Fauna Tariquía, Parque Nacional y Área
Natural de Manejo Integrado Aguaragüe and the Reserva Privada de
Patrimonio Natural de Corbalán.
 Getting There & Around
Most people visit Bolivia’s far south on the way to or from somewhere else.
Overland connections from Argentina, Paraguay and other regions within
Bolivia involve long bus rides. Tarija has the biggest airport in the area and
scheduled flights to La Paz, Sucre and other major towns go several times a
week.
Public transportation runs frequently between towns, but you’ll need a
4WD to get almost anywhere else. Few roads are paved so prepare yourself
for hauls that take longer than they should.
SOUTH CENTRAL BOLIVIA
Tarija
 4 / POP 153,500 / ELEV 1905M
Tarija’s biggest drawcard is the vineyards on its doorstep, and the city makes
a great base for visiting the surrounding wineries in El Valle de la
Concepción ( Click here ), home to the world´s highest wines and the throattingling singani (distilled grape spirit).
There’s not much else to do in Tarija, but it has some interesting colonial
architecture and grows on those who stay a while to enjoy the pleasantly
mild climate and take in the chilled atmosphere; the little city is as laid-back
as they get, with palm-lined squares, sizzling Argentine barbecues,
sprawling bar and cafe terraces, and tight streets with narrow pavements.
Despite the fact that many Bolivians from bigger cities regard South
Central Bolivia as a half-civilized backwater and that ‘ chapaco ’ is the butt
of tasteless jokes told in La Paz, Tarija is a worthy stop off on your way to
Argentina or Paraguay.
D3
C3
C1
Ta
r
i
j
a
 Top Sights
Basílica de San Francisco
Casa Dorada
Iglesia de San Roque
C3
F3
B3
A1
B1
B3
F4
D4
D4
E5
D2
B2
D1
C3
C2
B4
D2
C1
C2
B2
C3
C2
D4
F3
C3
D4
C3
C2
C3
C4
D4
Museo de Arqueología y Paleontología
 Sights 1 Castillo de Moisés Navajas 2 Cathedral 3 Iglesia de San Juan 4 Mirador Loma de San Juan
 Activities, Courses & Tours 5 Bodega Casa Vieja 6 Bodega La Concepción 7 Campos de Solana/Casa Real 8 Kohlberg 9 Prometa
10
Viva Tours
1
1 VTB Tours
 Sleeping
12 Gran Hotel Londres
13 Grand Hotel Tarija
14 Hostal del Sol
15 Hostal La Costañera
16 Hostal Zeballos
17 Hostería España
18 Hotel Luz Palace
19 Residencial El Rosario
20
Victoria Plaza Hotel
 Eating
21 Café Campero
22 Café Mokka
23 Churrasquería El Rodeo
24 Club Social Tarija
25 Ecosol
26 Heladería Napoli
27 Mercado Central
28
Taberna Gattopardo
29
Todo Natural
 Drinking
30 La Candela
B4
C3
B2
C3
C2
D2
B4
C3
D3
C2
B2
E3
C2
D4
C3
D3
31 La Cava de Strocco
32 Xoxo
 Information
33 Argentine Consulate
34 Banco Bisa
35 Banco Nacional
36 Casas de Cambio
37 German Consulate
38 Infotur
39 Lavandería La Esmeralda
40 Local Tourist Office
 Transport
41 Aerocon
42 Barron’s Rent-a-Car
43 Micros to Airport, San Lorenzo & Tomatitas
44 Micros to Padcaya
45 TAM
46 Trufis to San Jacinto
History
Tarija was founded as La Villa de San Bernardo de Tarixa by don Luis de
Fuentes y Vargas on July 4, 1574, under the orders of Viceroy don Francisco
de Toledo. In 1810 the region declared independence from Spanish rule.
Although the breakaways weren’t taken seriously by the Spanish, the
situation erupted into armed warfare on April 15, 1817. At the Batalla de la
Tablada, the chapacos won a major victory over the Spanish forces.
In the early 19th century, Tarija actively supported Bolivia’s struggle for
independence. Although Argentina wanted to annex the agriculturally
favorable area, Tarija opted to join the Bolivian Republic when it was
established in 1825.
Sights
You can see everything Tarija has to offer in an afternoon. Wander around
the narrow streets and imbibe the colonial architecture before rounding off
MUSEUM
MUSEUM
your day with a glass of the local vino on one of the plazas.
Casa Dorada
Offline map Google map
(Ingavi O-370; guided tour B$5; 9-11am & 3-5pm Mon-Fri, 9-11am Sat,
guided visits only on the hour) The Gilded House dates back to 1930, when
it was one of several properties owned by the wealthy Tarija landowner and
merchant Moisés Navajas (often described as Bolivia’s Teddy Roosevelt)
and his wife, Esperanza Morales. The building, with its roof topped with a
row of liberating angels, appears imposing and impressive on tourist
brochures, but in reality the exterior is sloppily splashed with gold and silver
paint.
The museum is on the upper floor, displaying original family furniture and
examples of the bits and bobs that they imported from Europe. Perhaps the
most worthwhile relic is the funola, an early type of piano that produced
music by forcing air through a strip of perforated paper. The building now
belongs to the university and houses the Casa de la Cultura.
 Museo de Arqueología y Paleontología
Offline map Google map
(cnr Lema & Trigo; 8am-noon & 3-6pm Mon-Sat) The university-run
Archaeology & Paleontology Museum provides a glimpse of the prehistoric
creatures and lives of the early peoples that once inhabited the Tarija area.
Downstairs you’ll see the well-preserved remains of several animals:
megatherium, a giant ground sloth that was the size of an elephant;
glyptodon, a prehistoric armadillolike creature about the size of a
Volkswagen Beetle; lestodon, another ground sloth that resembled a giantclawed aardvark; scelidotherium, a small ground sloth; smilodon, the sabertoothed tiger; and Cuvierionius tarijensi, a fossil elephant that was
discovered close to the city by the great French zoologist Georges Cuvier.
Upstairs the focus is on history, geology and anthropology, with displays
of old household implements, weapons, ceramics and various prehistoric
hunting tools, including a formidable cudgel known as a rompecabezas
(head-breaker). Look for the desiccated mummified corpse of a man from
CHURCH
CHURCH
CHURCH
LOOKOUT
the Pampagrande area, which shrunk via natural processes to measure just
35cm long.
Iglesia de San Roque
Offline map Google map
Architecturally, Tarija’s most unusual church and major landmark is the
bright, white 1887 Iglesia de San Roque. Dedicated to the city’s patron saint,
the church sits on the hill at the end of Trigo, lording it over the town. Its
balcony once served as a lookout post.
Basílica de San Francisco
Offline map Google map
(cnr Campos & La Madrid; museum 8am-6pm Mon-Fri) The Basílica de
San Francisco was founded in 1606 and is now a national monument. The
16th-century convent library and archives, which may conjure up images
reminiscent of The Name of the Rose, can be used only by researchers who
have been granted permission by the Franciscan order. Inside the basilica,
the free Museo Franciscano Frey Francisco Miguel Mari displays
ecumenical paintings, sculptures and artifacts.
Iglesia de San Juan
Offline map Google map
(Bolívar) The Iglesia de San Juan was constructed in 1632 and it was here
that the Spanish signed their surrender to the liberation army after the Batalla
de la Tablada. The garden serves as a mirador (lookout) over Tarija and its
dramatic backdrop of brown mountains.
Mirador Loma de San Juan
Offline map Google map
This park area above the tree-covered slopes of the Loma de San Juan
provides a grand city view and makes it a favorite with smooching students.
Climb uphill to the end of Calle Bolívar, then turn right behind the hill and
follow the footpath up the slope that faces away from the city.
NOTABLE BUILDING
CHURCH
WINE, ECOTOUR
TOUR
Castillo de Moisés Navajas
Offline map Google map
(Bolívar E-644) The exterior of this oddly prominent and deteriorating
private mansion is worth a look for its garish blue-and-white striped
‘bananas in pyjamas’ extravagance. It’s still inhabited and is occasionally
open for informal tours – check at the tourist office ( Click here ).
Cathedral
Offline map Google map
(cnr Campero & La Madrid) This rather dull-looking cathedral contains the
remains of prominent chapacos, including Tarija’s founder, don Luis de
Fuentes y Vargas. It was constructed in 1611 and has some interesting
stained glass depicting harvest scenes.
Tours
Standard packages offered by operators include tours to the wineries from
B$150 for a half-day or B$200 for a full day, the latter also including a city
tour and visits to other sights in El Valle de la Concepción. For more
information about the wineries of Valle de la Concepcion, Click here .
Viva Tours
Offline map Google map
( 663-8325; Bolívar 251, 2nd fl) For wine tours and adventurous ecotrips
to Tarija’s hinterlands – including four nearby national reserves – it’s tough
to beat Viva Tours.
VTB Tours
Offline map Google map
( 664-4341; Ingavi O-784) One of the city’s longest established agencies
with a reliable reputation.
Festivals & Events
RODEO
RELIGIOUS
RELIGIOUS
Tarija is one of Bolivia’s most festive towns, especially around Carnaval.
Ask around about the arts fair in October and about the Serrano Ham &
Cheese Festival.
Rodeo Chapaco
( Ap 15-21) In keeping with its gaucho heritage, Tarija stages an annual
rodeo in Parque Héroes de la Tablada, beginning on the departmental
holiday. Rodeo Chapaco includes all the standard cowboy events. To get
there, take micro C from the center.
Fiesta de San Roque
( Aug 16) Tarija’s well-known Fiesta de San Roque gives thanks to the
saint whose appearance supposedly marked the end of the plague and
leprosy in the area. The main celebration, however, doesn’t begin until the
first Sunday of September and then continues for eight days. It features
traditional musical performances and a colorful Chuncho (an indigenous
tribe) procession in which the participants wear ‘cover-all’ clothes
traditionally worn by lepers. A statue of the saint is carried, his clothes being
changed daily during the festival, and believers line the streets asking him to
cure their family’s ills.
Fiesta de las Flores
( 2nd Sun in Oct) The annual Fiesta de las Flores is a religious celebration
dedicated to the Virgin of Rosario. It begins with a procession, which sets off
from the Iglesia de San Juan. Along the route, spectators shower participants
with petals. The highlight of the day is a colorful fair and bazaar in which
the faithful spend lavishly for the benefit of the Church.
THE CHAPACO CARNAVAL
Tarija is Bolivia’s music and dance region, famous for its unique traditions and loud, colorful
festivals, especially during Carnaval (www.carnaval.tarija.gov.bo, in Spanish), when all chapacos
(Tarija locals) come out to dance, sing and party the days away. If you find yourself in the region
during a fiesta, here’s what to expect.
LUXURY HOTEL
The folk music of Tarija features unusual woodwind instruments, such as the erque and
quenilla, the caña and the camacheña. The song that accompanies the music is called a copla – a
direct import from Spain – with comic verses, sung in a duet. The dance that tops it all off is the
traditional Chuncho; dancers wear colorful outfits, feathered headgear and masks, symbolizing
the Chiriguano tribes and their long-term resistance against the conquerors.
Tarija’s Carnaval is one of the most animated in Bolivia and brilliant fun. To launch the
festivities, two Thursdays before Carnaval Tarija celebrates the Fiesta de Compadres. This
unique fiesta is Tarija’s largest pre-Carnaval festival. It’s assumed that the celebration, originating
in the village of Pola de Siero, in the northern Spanish region of Asturias, was inspired by the
wives of Spanish colonial authorities and soldiers, who saw to it that social customs and morals
were strictly followed. It was eventually adopted by the local indigenous population and is now
celebrated by the entire community with music, dancing and special basket tableaux constructed
of bread known as bollus preñaus. Flowers, fruits, tubers, small cakes and other gifts are passed
between female friends and relatives.
Throughout the Carnaval season, the streets fill with dancing, original chapaco music and
colorfully costumed country folk who turn up in town for the event. There’s a Grand Ball in the
main plaza after the celebration and the entire town comes out for the dancing and performances
by folk groups, bands and orchestras. Beware: water balloons figure prominently in the
festivities.
On the Sunday after Carnaval, the neighborhood near the cemetery enacts a ‘funeral’ in which
the devil is burned and buried in preparation for Lent. Paid mourners (actors pretending to mourn
the death of the devil) lend the ritual a morose air – although we suspect they’re actually
lamenting that they must now remain vice free for the 40 days until Easter.
Sleeping
Budget accommodation is found mainly north of Bolívar, though most
places in this price tier do not have heating and you may need it in winter.
The cheapest rooms have shared bathroom; higher rates get you a private
bathroom and cable TV. Midrange and upmarket options are south of
Bolívar. Bus services arriving from Villamontes get into town during the
early hours of the morning, so many hotels offer half rates if you book in
advance.
Resort Hotel Los Parrales $$$
( 664-8444; www.losparraleshotel.com; Urbanización Carmén de
Aranjuez; s/d B$800/975; ) In a relaxed setting 3.5km from the center,
Tarija’s only five-star option offers you a complimentary cocktail when you
arrive and has a spa, a giant Jacuzzi and a lovely open-air dining area
overlooking the countryside. The rooms are colonial-style luxury, with very
HOTEL
HOTEL
HOTEL
HOTEL
comfy beds. Significant discounts (up to 45%) are available for stays of
more than one night during the low season.
Hostal del Sol $$
Offline map Google map
( 666-5259; www.hoteldelsol.com.bo; Sucre N-782; s/d B$250/350; )
Among the nicest in town, Hostal del Sol has coffee-colored walls, flatscreen TVs, marble floors and a bright, modern design. Friendly service,
good breakfasts and free internet make this a great place to stay.
Victoria Plaza Hotel $$$
Offline map Google map
( 664-2600; www.victoriaplazahoteltarija.com; cnr La Madrid & Sucre;
s/d B$300/450; ) A charming, four-star place just off the main plaza,
with lovely 1950s rooms decked with gleaming wooden floors, comfy beds
and old-school furnishings. All rooms are en suite (though the bathrooms are
a bit dated) and have cable TV. A stylish cafe-bar, La Bella Epoca, is
downstairs.
Grand Hotel Tarija $$
Offline map Google map
( 664-2684; Sucre N-770; s B$160, s/d with cable TV B$210/300; )
One of the town oldies that’s busy for lunch when locals flood to the hotel’s
restaurant. The spacious, ocher-colored rooms are comfortable and central,
though some are aging more gracefully than others. Avoid the patio-facing
rooms or you’ll have your curtains drawn all day.
Hostal La Costañera $$
Offline map Google map
( 664-2851; cnr Victor Paz Estenssoro & Saracho; s/d incl breakfast
B$200/300; ) Rooms here are elegant and decorated in caramels and
sandy shades, with spacious bathrooms and great showers. There are phones,
mini-bar, heaters (upon request) and parking, plus the staff is super friendly.
HOTEL
HOSTAL
HOTEL
PENSION
PENSION
Hotel Luz Palace $$
Offline map Google map
( 663-5700; Sucre N-921; s/d/t B$180/300/420; ) Recently
refurbished, this huge colonial hotel-cum-shopping-mall offers great value
with its modern, spacious rooms.
Hostal Zeballos $
Offline map Google map
( 664-2068; Sucre N-966; s/d B$120/160, without bathroom B$60/120)
Superficially the most attractive budget option, with dozens of potted plants
and climbers giving the place a fresh, spring feel. However, make sure you
see the room before you commit: the basement ones are grim and dark; go
for something upstairs.
Gran Hotel Londres $
Offline map Google map
( 664-2369; Daniel Campos 1072; s/d B$80/120, without bathroom
B$45/80) This kind of retro style may once have looked very grand in
London (or maybe not!), but these days wood-paneled walls and dated
tourism posters might best be described as quirky.
Residencial El Rosario $
Offline map Google map
( 664-2942; Ingavi 777; s/d B$40/80, with cable TV B$45/90) It’s rare to
find a budget place that is so well tended, with freshly painted and clean
(though rather small) rooms that look onto a quiet patio. There are reliable
gas-heated showers, laundry sinks and a common room with cable TV.
Hostería España $
Offline map Google map
( 666-5003; Corrado O-546; s/d B$80/120, without bathroom B$50/90) A
decent budget option, but the slightly overpriced rooms are pretty cold in
winter. The hot showers and a pleasant flowery patio keep it popular with
PIZZERIA
INTERNATIONAL
BUFFET
long-term university student residents and there is plenty of tourist
information at reception.
Eating
Chapaco cuisine is unique and Tarija’s restaurants pay it due homage. You’ll
need to be brave to try ranga ranga (tripe with onion, tomato and chili) and
chan faina (lamb guts with greens), but even delicate stomachs will enjoy
sopa de mani (peanut soup) or saice (diced meat and vegetables). Don’t
forget to sample the desserts too – dulce de lacayote (caramelized squash),
pepitas de leche (cinnamon fudge) and tojori (pancakes with cloves and
aniseed) are all favorites. Get a copy of the Guía Gastronomica from the
tourist office for more mouthwatering ideas.
Pizza Pazza $$$
(Carlos Lazcano, cnr Belgrano y Pino; pizza B$40-110) Exuberant hostess
Edith Paz Zamora has put together a really unique blend of art and, you
guessed it, pizza. The walls are splashed with colorful paintings (many
featuring giraffe-necked, bug-eyed women!) and those with a creative ilk
take over on Thursdays (art night) and Fridays (Bohemian night), when
folklore, music and dancing are added to the tasty menu. Ring the bell to get
in!
Taberna Gattopardo $$
Offline map Google map
(Plaza Luis de Fuentes y Vargas; mains B$22-50) This welcoming
European-run tavern is one of Tarija’s most popular hangouts. There are
good espressos and cappuccinos in the morning, well-prepared salads,
burgers, pizzas and ceviche (Peruvian dish of raw seafood marinated in lime
juice) at midday, and chicken fillets and fondue bourguignonne in the
evening.
La Floresta $$
(Carretera a San Jacinto, Barrio Germán Busch; buffet B$45-60; FriSun) A great place for pitchers of fresh lemonade and all-you-can-eat buffets
of pork, chicken and salads served in a lovely, leafy garden with a large
BARBECUE
BARBECUE
SANDWICHES
SANDWICHES
ICE CREAM
swimming pool. It’s a bit out of town, so you should get a taxi here – the
staff will call you one for the return journey.
Churrasquería El Rodeo $$$
Offline map Google map
(Oruro E-749; mains B$40-70) With Argentina so close, it’s not surprising
that big slabs of red meat are popular in Tarija, and that forms the basis of
what you get here. This sparkling and classy choice also has a salad bar, but
really it is a place for those who like their steak.
Club Social Tarija $$
Offline map Google map
(Calle 15 de Abril E-271; almuerzo B$25-40, mains B$40-70) The Club
Social has gone upmarket, but its lunch menu is still good value. At night it
metamorphoses into a stylish grill restaurant, with prices to boot.
Café Mokka $$
Offline map Google map
(Plaza Sucre; mains B$16-42, cocktails B$18-22; ) A stylish place with a
pavement terrace and wi-fi access, overlooking the square. It serves average
coffee, but decent cocktails and good, light grub. Tables are decorated with
weird arrangements of peanuts and coffee beans.
Café Campero $
Offline map Google map
(Campero near Bolívar; mains B$10-30; dinner Tue-Sun) Dive into the
fabulous range of breads, cakes and pastries, including French- style
baguettes, chocolate cake and cuñapes (cassava and cheese rolls). And if you
prefer to have yours to go, pop into the Palacio de las Masas next door,
which is open in the morning.
Heladería Napoli $$
Offline map Google map
MARKET
HEALTH FOOD
HEALTH FOOD
BAR
(Campero N-630; per kg B$50; 10am-8pm) Serves simply divine scoops
of ice cream.
Mercado Central $
Offline map Google map
(Sucre & Domingo Paz) At the northeast corner of the market, street vendors
sell snacks and pastries unavailable in other parts of Bolivia, including
delicious crêpe-like panqueques. Breakfast is served out the back, other
cheap meals are upstairs and you’ll find fresh juices in the produce section.
Don’t miss the huge bakery and sweets section off Bolívar.
Self-Catering
Ecosol
Offline map Google map
(Plaza Sucre) Pick up organic and ecofriendly foodstuffs from this
interesting little corner shop.
Todo Natural
Offline map Google map
(Sucre 397) Snacks and more for those who like to keep in trim.
Drinking & Entertainment
Tarija’s bar and cafe scene is vibrant and many of the popular lunch spots
during the day transform into drinking dens after dark. Plaza Sucre is the hub
of activity for the younger generation. Keep an eye out for flyers advertising
peñas (folk-music programs), usually held at restaurants on weekends.
La Candela
Offline map Google map
(Plaza Sucre; 9am-midnight Mon-Fri, 9am-2am Sat & Sun) Frenchowned, this thriving little bar-cafe has a bohemian atmosphere, a great snack
menu as well as live music at weekends.
BAR
BAR
Xoxo
Offline map Google map
(Calle 15 de Abril; 8am-midnight Mon-Sun) Retro rock chic is the go at
this bar-cafe. Walls are adorned with pop art and drinks cans from across the
globe.
La Cava de Strocco
Offline map Google map
(Calle 15 de Abril; noon-3pm & 7pm-midnight) This is a refined
restaurant-bar with courtyard seating.
Information
Street numbers are preceded by O (oeste – west) for those addresses west of
Colón, and E (este – east) for those east of Colón; addresses north of Victor
Paz Estenssoro (Av Las Américas) take an N.
Between 1pm and 4pm Tarija becomes a virtual ghost town. Conduct all
your business in the morning or you’ll have to wait until after the siesta.
Emergency
Hospital San Juan de Dios ( 664-5555; Santa Cruz s/n)
Police ( 664-2222; cnr Campero & Calle 15 de Abril)
Immigration
Migración ( 664-3594; Ingavi 789) For entry/exit stamps or to extend
your stay.
Laundry
Out of hours at the lavandería, ask at larger hotels. Expect to pay B$2 to
B$3 per item.
Lavandería La Esmeralda Offline map Google map ( 664-2043; La Madrid
O-157; 8:30am-12:30pm & 3-7:30pm Mon-Fri, 8am-1pm Sat) Does a
quick machine-wash-and-dry service for B$12 per kilo.
Money
There are numerous ATMs around the plaza and at the airport. Casas de
Cambio Offline map Google map (Bolívar) changes US dollars and Argentine
pesos. Banco Bisa Offline map Google map (Trigo) and Banco Nacional
Offline map Google map (Sucre) will change traveler’s checks.
Post Office
Post office (cnr Sucre & Virginio Lema)
Telephone & Internet Access
Internet places are ten a penny and usually have phone cabins incorporated
as well. Try along Bolívar for decent connections (per hour B$3 to B$4).
Tourist Information
Bus terminal tourist kiosk ( 663-7701; Av Victor Paz Estenssoro) Often
open when the main tourist offices are closed.
Infotur Offline map Google map ( 667-2633; cnr 15 de Abril & Trigo;
8am-noon & 2:30-6:30pm Mon-Fri, 9am-noon & 4-7pm Sat & Sun)
Distributes basic town maps and is reasonably helpful with queries regarding
sites in and around town.
Local tourist office Offline map Google map ( 663-3581; cnr Bolívar &
Sucre; 2.30-6.30pm Mon-Fri) Not much material or information, but
friendly staff.
Getting There & Away
Air
The Oriel Lea Plaza Airport ( 664-2195) is 3km east of town off Av
Victor Paz Estenssoro. TAM Offline map Google map ( 664-2734; La Madrid
O-470) has flights to Santa Cruz (B$558) every day except Thursday and
regular flights to Sucre (B$477) with connections to La Paz (B$783) and
Cochabamba (B$519). The short hop to Yacuiba (B$308) leaves daily except
Tuesday and Thursday. Aerocon Offline map Google map ( 665-8634;
Ballivián 525) flies daily between Yacuiba and Santa Cruz (B$880) via
Tarija.
Bus
The bus terminal ( 663-6508) is at the east end of town, a 20-minute walk
from the center along Victor Paz Estenssoro. Annoyingly, if you are looking
for a quick getaway, almost all services leave in the afternoon between
4:30pm and 8:30pm. Services to Santa Cruz pass through Villamontes from
where there are connections to Yacuiba and Asunción in Paraguay, though
frustratingly the latter pass through in the early hours of the morning
meaning you’ll have to wait almost 20 hours for your onward ride.
DESTINATION COST (B$) DURATION (HR)
Cochabamba 90-115 26
Oruro 90 20
Potosí 60-70 12-15
Sucre 70-90 18
Santa Cruz 90-115 24
Villamontes 40-50 9
Getting Around
To/From the Airport
Syndicate taxis from the airport to the center cost about B$20, but if you
walk 100m past the airport gate (visible from outside the terminal), you’ll
pay as little as B$12 per person for a normal taxi. Otherwise, cross the main
road and take a passing micro A or trufi, which runs by the bus terminal and
the Mercado Central.
Bus
City micros and trufis cost B$2.50 per ride. Routes are clearly marked on the
front windows of the vehicles.
Car & Bike Hire
Barron’s Rent-a-Car Offline map Google map ( 663-6853; Ingavi E-339)
Taxi
Although you can walk just about anywhere in Tarija (including to the
airport), taxis cost B$5/8 per person for day/night trips around the center,
including to the bus terminal.
San Jacinto Reservoir
If you’re hot in Tarija and after some aquatic refreshment, go to the 17-sqkm reservoir, 7km southwest of town. There’s a tourist complex with little
cabañas (cabins), a restaurant serving dorado (a delicious local fish) and a
place to rent canoes or, if you feel the need for speed, jet skis. Those who
prefer more tranquil ways to enjoy themselves will delight in the nice walks
along the shore and surrounding ridges. Though billed as one of the region’s
biggest attractions, it’s not – but it does make for a pleasant day trip and is
popular with chapacos on Sunday afternoons. Trufis run to San Jacinto (B$3,
10 minutes) every 20 minutes from the corner of Ingavi and Campos
(outside the Palacio de la Justicia) in Tarija.
SAN LORENZO
San Lorenzo (population 21,400), 15km north of Tarija along the Tupiza road, is a quaint colonial
village with cobbled streets, carved balconies, a church built in 1709 and a flowery plaza. It’s
best known, however, as the home of José Eustaquio ‘Moto’ Méndez, the hero of the Batalla de la
Tablada, whose former house is now the Museo Moto Méndez (admission free; 9am12:30pm & 3-5pm Mon-Sat, 10am-noon Sun). The popular Fiesta de San Lorenzo takes place
here on August 10 and features chapaco musical instruments and dancing.
After seeing the museum, head 2km north to the former Méndez family chapel, Capilla de
Lajas, which is delicate, exquisitely proportioned and a fine example of colonial architecture.
Just to the north is the former home of ex-president Jaime Paz Zamora, with an adjacent
billboard paying homage to him.
Micros and trufis (B$3, 30 minutes) to San Lorenzo leave from the corner of Domingo Paz and
Saracho in Tarija approximately every 20 minutes during the day.
El Valle de la Concepción
 4 / ELEV 1900-2100M
The Concepción Valley, or simply ‘El Valle,’ is the heart of Bolivian wine
and singani production. The village of La Concepción still bears many
picturesque colonial elements and the plaza sports some lovely endemic
flowering ceibo trees, but there is no reason to stay here – it is much more
conveniently visited on a day trip from Tarija.
The Fiesta de la Uva (Grape Festival), held here for three days in March,
coincides with the grape harvest.
Wineries
The Tarija region claims to be home to the ‘world’s highest wines’. The
grapevines, first brought to the region by 17th-century missionaries, grow at
a staggering 1900m and 2100m and are only 22 degrees south of the equator.
They ripen quicker than their sea-level cousins and the wine is given a head
start in the maturing process, making rich reserves easier to produce. The
grapes grown here are a mix of muscat of Alexandria and Californian, but
with a crisp taste all their own.
Most bodegas also produce singani, a distilled grape spirit (40%) of
varying quality. Mi Socio, the cheapest and harshest, is marked by a bluelabel; the red-label Special de Oro is of medium price and quality; the best,
Colección Privada, is a flowery, fresh, fragrant spirit and has a black label.
The cheaper types are usually drunk mixed with soda and lemon. All offices
sell bottles at factory prices (B$15 to B$100).
Bodega La Concepción WINERY
Offline map Google map
( 664-5040; www.bodegaslaconcepcion.com; office O’Connor N-642,
Tarija) Considered the region’s best winery, it promotes its vintages as the
‘world’s highest wines’. It’s found 25km south of Tarija, just before the
village of Concepción.
WINERY
WINERY
WINERY
Bodega Casa Vieja
Offline map Google map
( 666-2605; www.lacasavieja.info; office 15 de Abril & Saracho, Tarija)
Home to the best patero (foot-trodden) wine, this atmospheric winery has a
lovely restaurant (lunch B$25). It’s in the village of Concepción, about 30km
from Tarija.
Campos de Solana/Casa Real
Offline map Google map
( 664-8481; www.casa-real.com; office 15 de Abril E-259, Tarija) Modern
winery with big vaults of wine, in the Santa Ana area, 17km southwest of
Tarija.
Kohlberg
Offline map Google map
( 663-6366; www.bodegaskohlberg.com; office 15 de Abril E-275, Tarija)
The area’s oldest winery and also the most popular.
Getting There & Away
For a guided visit to the valley’s wineries, contact Viva Tours ( Click here )
or VTB Tours ( Click here ) or the winery offices in Tarija. If you prefer to
visit under your own steam, El Valle lies off the route toward Bermejo; take
the right fork at the tranca (police post) east of Tarija. Taxis and micro V
leave when full (B$5, 30 minutes) from the corner of Corrado and Trigo.
Padcaya & Chaguaya
Visiting Padcaya, south of Tarija, brings full meaning to the old saying that
‘it’s better to travel than to arrive’, with the route twisting its way through
45km of lovely mountainous desert and green river valleys. The town itself
has a few old colonial buildings and is located in an area rich in fossils,
meaning you are more likely to bump into a paleontologist than another
tourist.
Chaguaya, 68km south of Tarija, is home to the pilgrimage shrine
Santuario de la Virgen de Chaguaya. The Fiesta de la Virgen de Chaguaya
begins on August 15; celebrations follow on the subsequent Sunday. Alcohol
is forbidden at this time. Pilgrims from all over Bolivia arrive during the
following month, some making the trip on foot (including an annual
procession from Tarija).
Micros (B$7, 90 minutes) from Tarija to Padcaya depart every 20 minutes
from the Parada del Chaco. Less frequent services run to Chaguaya from the
same place, leaving midafternoon.
LA FIESTA DE LECHE Y QUESO
Tiny Rosillas (population 1000), a satellite town located to the west of Padcaya, is the host of an
off-the-wall celebration dedicated to the products provided by our uddered amiga, the humble
moo-cow. Taking place during the last week of March, the Fiesta de Leche y Queso is a cheesy
celebration that the locals milk for all it’s worth. It’s a slightly weird affair, with something
resembling a bovine beauty pageant, bull-fighting and plenty of music. It concludes with the local
ranchers asking Pachamama (Mother Earth) for a bountiful harvest so they can do it all again the
following year.
Reserva Biológica Cordillera de
Sama
The Sama Biological Reserve protects representative samples of both the
Altiplano and inter-Andean valley ecosystems. In the highland portion of the
reserve (3400m above sea level), one can visit the Tajzara lakes, a RAMSAR
site of international importance for aquatic birds. Temperatures in the
highlands stay quite chilly year-round but are slightly more comfortable in
the drier winter months (May to August). The best time to visit the lower
elevations is in the summer, when it’s warm enough to swim.
The reserve is administered by Servicio Nacional de Áreas Protegidas
(SERNAP), which has an office opposite the bus terminal ( Click here ) in
Tarija. Entry to the reserve costs US$15 and the fee is not included in the
prices offered by tour companies.
TAJZARA SECTION
The area known as Tajzara lies high on the cold and windy puna (high open
grasslands) of western Tarija department. Here, several shallow flamingofilled lagoons appear like jewels in the harsh Altiplano, vegetated only by
thola (a small desert bush) and paja brava (spiky grass of the high
Altiplano). Tarija’s New Agers consider Tajzara to be a natural power site
while the locals claim that the lakes are haunted by nocturnal spirit voices
and woe betide anybody that stays out after dark. The night air does produce
some eerie voicelike cries, but unimaginative people ascribe the
phenomenon to winds rushing through the thola.
Along the eastern shores of the lagoons, the wind has heaped up large
arenales (sand dunes). An interesting climb takes you to the symmetrical
peak of Muyuloma, which rises about 1000m above the plain. The summit
affords views across the lagoons and beyond to the endless expanses of the
southern Altiplano. The return climb takes the better part of a day.
An albergue (basic guesthouse) near the Tajzara visitors center was out of
action at the time of writing, but contact SERNAP for the latest information.
The observatory here is a favorite with bird-watchers in search of three of
the world’s six flamingo species, and the rare horned and giant coots. Hikers
can spend a very enjoyable six to eight hours on the wonderful Inca Trail as
it descends 2000m to the valley below. With luck, you may see vicuñas,
condors or mysterious petroglyphs of unknown origin.
INTER-ANDEAN VALLEYS
During the summertime, there are several places in the valley to go
swimming in the rivers, including Tomatitas, Coimata and Chorros de
Jurina.
Tomatitas, with its natural swimming holes, three lovely rivers (the Sella,
Guadalquivir and Erquis) and happy little eateries, is popular with daytrippers from Tarija. The best swimming is immediately below the
footbridge, where there’s also a park with a campground and barbecue sites.
From here you can walk or hitch the 9km to Coimata. From Tarija, turn left
off the main San Lorenzo road. After less than 1km, you’ll pass a cemetery
on the left, which is full of flowers and brightly colored crosses. Just beyond
it, bear right towards Coimata. Once there, turn left at the soccer field and
continue to the end of the road. Here you’ll find a small cascade of water and
a swimming hole that makes a great escape, as lots of Tarijeño families can
attest. There’s also a choice of small restaurants serving misquinchitos and
doraditos (fried local fish with white corn), as well as cangrejitos (small
freshwater crabs). From this point, you can follow a walking track 40
minutes upstream to the base of the two-tiered Coimata Falls, which has a
total drop of about 60m.
Another swimming hole and waterfall are found at Rincón de la Victoria,
6km southwest of Tomatitas in a green plantationlike setting. Instead of
bearing right beyond the colorful cemetery, as you would for Coimata,
follow the route to the left. From the fork, it’s 5km to Rincón de la Victoria.
The twin 40m waterfalls at Chorros de Jurina, 26km from Tarija, also
make an agreeable destination for a day trip. Set in a beautiful but unusual
landscape, one water- fall cascades over white stone while the other pours
over black stone. In late winter, however, they may diminish to a mere
trickle or dry up completely.
The route from Tarija to Jurina passes through some impressive rural
landscapes. From near the flowery plaza in San Lorenzo, follow the Jurina
road, which turns off beside the Casa de Moto Méndez. After 6km, you’ll
pass a school on the left. Turn left 200m beyond the school and follow that
road another 2.5km to the waterfalls. From the end of the road, it’s a fiveminute walk to the base of either waterfall. The one on the left is reached by
following the river upstream; for the other, follow the track that leads from
behind a small house.
Getting There & Away
Tour companies in Tarija organize overnight trips to the most accessible
areas of Sama, but require a minimum of three people and an advance
booking. Buses to Villazón depart between 8pm and 9pm and pass through
Tajzara approximately five hours later. The Tajzara visitors center is a 20-
minute walk from the road.
TOUR
Micros A and B to Tomatitas leave every 20 minutes from the corner of
Domingo Paz and Saracho in Tarija (B$1.50), some continuing on to Jurina
(B$5) via San Lorenzo. Get off near the school and then walk the rest of the
way. For Coimata, similarly frequent departures leave from the corner of
Campesino and Comercio (B$3) in Tarija.
Reserva Nacional de Flora y Fauna
Tariquía
The lovely and little-known 2470-sq-km Tariquía Flora & Fauna Reserve
(created in 1989) protects a large portion of cloud forest and a smaller area
of polylepis woodland on the eastern slopes of the department of Tarija’s
mountains. Ranging in altitude from 400m to 1500m, it houses rare animals
such as the spectacled bear, as well as hundreds of bird species including the
threatened rufous-throated dipper and the spectacular military macaw.
Access to this largely wild reserve is extremely complicated and there are
no formal tours. Hiking is possible but extremely challenging in this remote
area and should not be attempted without a guide. The best time to visit
Tariquía is during the dry winter months (May to September) when the
climate is mild and river crossings are possible.
Prometa
Offline map Google map
( 663-3873; www.prometa.org.bo; Alejandro del Carpio E-659, Tarija;
albergue r per person B$100-150) Prometa operates seven camps in
Tariquía, including a simple albergue with camping and cooking facilities –
the Tariquía Community Center in the heart of the reserve. From the road it’s
a two-day hike to the center, but allow six days to fully explore the area on
foot. You’ll need to bring camping gear. Contact Prometa’s office for details
of how to visit.
PENSION
THE CHACO
Flat and sparsely populated, the Chaco is a vast expanse of thorn scrub
where dispersed ranchers, isolated indigenous villages and Mennonite
communities farm plots of land – it’s also dotted by police and military
troops, guarding their posts. This silent flatland covers most of southeastern
Bolivia and western Paraguay and stretches into neighboring Argentina.
Wildlife abounds in the undisturbed wilderness of the Chaco. With
humans a relatively rare species, animals are bolder and more visible here
than in the Amazon and this is one of the best places in South America to
see large mammals like the tapir, jaguar and puma. Plant life amazes with a
series of bizarre (and often spiny) adaptations to the xeric environment.
Apart from being prickled by various species of cacti, you’ll be surprised by
brilliant flowering bushes and trees, such as the yellow carnival bush; the
white-and-yellow huevo (egg) tree; the pink or white thorny bottle tree,
locally known as the toboroche or palo borracho (drunken tree); and the
red-flowering, hard quebracho (axe-breaker) tree whose wood, too heavy to
float, is one of the Chaco’s main exports.
Yacuiba
 4 / POP 83,500
There’s only one reason to visit Yacuiba: to cross the border between
Argentina and Bolivia. Tiny Pocitos, 5km south, is the easternmost
Bolivia–Argentina border crossing.
Sleeping & Eating
The only thing Yacuiba has going for it is that there are lots of hotels. The
best of the limited eating options are around the plaza.
Gran Residencial Victoria $
HOTEL
( 682-3752; San Martín 639; s/d B$40/60, d with bathroom & cable TV
B$90; ) Hyperbolic name? Well yes, but this is the best of the motley
selection of residenciales in front of the bus terminal; useful if you have an
early bus to catch (or indeed a late one) and are looking for somewhere to
rest your head for a few hours. Even the cheap rooms have air-con.
Hotel Paris $$
( 682-2182; Comercio at Campero; s/d B$180/ 225; ) Two blocks from
the plaza, this is an upmarket hotel decked out in hardwoods that give it a
classical feel. All rooms have TV and air-conditioning and there’s a
pleasant courtyard restaurant for meals.
Getting There & Around
Yacuiba’s bus terminal is about 10 blocks from the plaza on Av San Martín.
Buses for Tarija (B$40 to B$60, 12 hours) leave before 9am and after 6pm.
Numerous flotas leave every evening for Santa Cruz (B$51 to B$110, 15
hours) via Villamontes and Camiri, and trufis (B$20, 1½ hours) depart for
Villamontes throughout the day when full. There is a B$2 terminal fee
payable on boarding any bus.
Yacuiba’s railway station ( 682-2308) ticket window opens in the
morning on the day of departure; line up early. A single service runs to
Santa Cruz (B$47, 16½ hours) via Villamontes (B$11, 2½ hours) on Friday
at 5pm.
Flights to Tarija depart with TAM on Tuesday and Saturday (B$390) if
there is enough demand, and Aerocon flies daily to Santa Cruz (B$880) via
Tarija (B$522).
If you are unfortunate enough to get stuck in town and are looking for
something to do, check the town’s online information portal
(www.yacuiba.com, in Spanish) for ideas or event schedules.
BORDER CROSSINGS INTO ARGENTINA
The two main border crossings to Argentina are at Yacuiba and Bermejo, the former being the
most accessible from Santa Cruz and the latter from Tarija. C asas de cambio (exchange houses)
are abundant in both border towns. It is in your best interest to get rid of your extra bolivianos
before crossing the border – rates in Argentina are not favorable. Note that Argentina is one
hour ahead of Bolivia.
Shared taxis (B$10 per person) shuttle between the terminal at Yacuiba and Argentine
immigration at Pocitos. After crossing the border on foot, onward bus services to Tartagal and
Embarcación leave every couple of hours, where you can make connections to Salta, Jujuy and
Buenos Aires.
Crossing to Argentina from Bermejo is slightly more complicated as the border is only open
from 8am to 5pm. Chalanas (ferries) over the river (B$3) leave every few minutes. Be sure to
pick up an exit stamp before crossing.
Bermejo’s bus terminal is eight blocks southeast of the main plaza. Buses leave every couple
of hours from Tarija to Bermejo (B$20, three hours) between 7:30am and 9pm, but you’ll need
to get a morning service (last departure 10:30am) if you want to cross the border the same day.
From Agua Blanca, Argentine buses to Orán (US$2, one hour) depart hourly from the terminal
opposite the immigration office. From Orán, you can connect to Argentina’s Salta, Jujuy and
Tucumán.
Villamontes
 4 / POP 23,800 / ELEV 383M
As the temperature soars and the hot, dry winds coat everything with a thick
layer of dust, you can see the pride rising in the residents of Villamontes
almost as fast as the mercury, for this is officially Bolivia’s hottest town.
Despite the heat, it is a welcoming place and the majority-indigenousGuaraní population means that lovely woven baskets and furniture made
from natural Chaco materials can be found at the town’s market.
Villamontes’ biggest employer is the local gas plant, which is responsible
for an influx of migrant workers from across the border in Paraguay. The
6pm whistle that rings out across town indicates the end of the working day.
The best time to visit is during the annual fishing festival on the Río
Pilcomayo in August, the fishy obsession being exemplified by the pride
with which locals give directions that invariably reference the location in
relation to the El Pescadito statue, the town’s only landmark.
Sleeping & Eating
HOTEL
PENSION
PENSION
Villamontes is known for its fish restaurants, shacklike structures clustered
at the base of the bridge on the road to Yacuiba, which serve freshly caught
surubí among other local scalies. You’ll be given the option to have your
fish cooked a la parilla (grilled) or frito (fried). Pick the former unless you
want the only moisture in it to be cooking oil.
The town center is 12 blocks west of El Pescadito, but there is no real
reason to head there unless it is to stock up for your journey at the
humungus market at the corners of Arcos Mendes and Av Ingavi. There are
a couple of churrasquerías near the plaza that also serve almuerzos, but
none are up to much.
Hotel El Rancho Olivo $$
( 684-2049; www.elranchoolivo.com; Av Méndez Arcos; s/d B$250/330;
) Opposite the railway station this is Villamontes’ best hotel by a
long shot. Rooms try hard to aim for moderate luxury, with their stained
wooden furniture and decorative lamps, but the 4WD vehicles that line up
in the car park are enough to confirm that this is the place of choice in
Villamontes for those with a bit of money to spend. A pleasant but pricey
restaurant sits by the side.
Residencial El Gran Chaco $
( 672-4620; main road a block south of El Pescadito; r per person B$80;
) Brand spanking new, this tastefully presented residencial is superb
value for money if you are just passing through because of its perfect
location near El Pescadito and spick-and-span bathrooms. The owners are
friendly and helpful, despite their grumpy dog.
Residencial El Pescadito $
( 672-2896; r per person with/without bathroom B$80/60; ) Budget
option on the main road opposite El Pescadito and close to the bus offices
for departures to Paraguay.
CROSSING THE BORDER INTO
PARAGUAY
Crossing the border into Paraguay has never been easier. The infamous Ruta Trans-Chaco is
paved along its entire length on the Paraguay side, though it takes a slight detour away from the
original Trans-Chaco at La Patria, crossing into Bolivia at the military checkpoint of Infante
Rivarola. Several bus services from Santa Cruz via Villamontes now run this route to Asunción
on a daily basis.
Bolivian customs formalities take place at Ibibobo. You will need to present your passport
and visa to both customs and military representatives. Buses typically pass here around 4am or
5am, so don’t expect a tranquil night’s sleep. From here the Paraguayan border point, Infante
Rivarola, is another hour or so away but Paraguayan customs formalities are not carried out until
you are well beyond here, at the domineering aduana (customs office) in Mariscal Estigarribia.
Buses typically arrive here around 7am or 8am.
This is a notorious smuggling route so expect to be lined up with your bags as customs
officials and sniffer dogs rifle through your private possessions. Once you are given the OK to
proceed, you get your entry stamp from the small immigration office just outside the main
compound. There is a service station here that sells food if you’re peckish and, provided you are
not carrying anything you shouldn’t be, it is as simple as that!
Getting There & Away
Buses run to Tarija (B$50, nine hours) and Santa Cruz (B$120, eight hours)
after 6pm from the terminal two blocks west of El Pescadito. Trufis for
Camiri (B$30, two hours) leave when full from the main road a block north
of El Pescadito and for Yacuiba (B$20, 1½ hours) from three blocks south.
The main reason for stopping in Villamontes, however, is to catch a bus
connection to Asunción in Paraguay (B$300, 15 hours) via the border
crossing at Infante Rivarole before continuing on to the Trans-Chaco Road.
All companies have their offices on the main road close to the El Pescadito
statue and buses pass through in the early hours of the morning. You should
buy your ticket in advance, but you will be allocated to a bus irrespective of
which company sold you the ticket. Unfortunately, the quality of service
varies considerably between companies and which one you get is pot luck.
The train to Yacuiba (B$11, 2½ hours) passes through on Friday morning
at 5am and returns to Santa Cruz (B$38, 14 hours) on Friday evening at
7:45pm, but the route is painfully slow.
Parque Nacional y Área Natural de
Manejo Integrado Aguaragüe
The long and narrow 1080-sq-km Aguaragüe National Park takes in much
of the mountains of Serranía de Aguaragüe, which divide the vast Gran
Chaco and the highlands of the department of Tarija. Right in the center of
the region known for being the hottest in Bolivia, it is best visited in the
cooler winter months (May to October).
Although it lacks visitor facilities, the Cañón del Pilcomayo is easily
accessible from Villamontes. The name of the park comes from Guaraní,
meaning ‘the lair of the jaguar’, because the range is famous for being
home to this lovely spotty (and scary) cat. Foxes, tapirs, anteaters, assorted
parrots, numerous plant species and 70% of the region’s potable water
sources can also be found here. Viva Tours ( Click here ) conducts guided
hikes and visits, or negotiate with a taxi driver in Villamontes.
CAÑÓN DEL PILCOMAYO
In the beautiful Pilcomayo Canyon at El Chorro Grande waterfall, fish are
prevented from swimming further upstream. Abundant surubí, sábalo and
dorado are easily caught, making the area a favorite with anglers from all
over the country. The predatory dorado is prized by game fishermen
because of its legendary fight; it’s particularly interesting because it has an
odd hinge at the front of its jawbone that allows its mouth to open wide
horizontally.
There are great views from the restaurants 7km to 10km west of town
where you can sample local fish dishes.
To reach the gorge, you can take any Tarija-bound transportation, or taxi
to the tranca and hitch or walk from there (as usual, weekends are the best
time to hitchhike). Where the road forks, bear right and continue another
2km to the mouth of the gorge.
MUSEUM
RESERVA PRIVADA DE PATRIMONIO
NATURAL DE CORBALÁN
This private 18-sq-km reserve on the Paraguayan border was established in 1996 to protect a
choice piece of Gran Chaco. Jaguars, pumas, tapirs, giant anteaters and giant armadillos are
found here, though you’ll more likely see Azara’s fox, the three-banded armadillo and birds
such as the blue-fronted Amazon parrot and Chaco chachalaca. The only access route is a poor
road from Villamontes, which takes at least four hours with a good vehicle. If you plan to visit,
accommodations are limited to a simple park rangers’ camp, and you need to bring your own
food, water and other supplies. The only commercial access is with Viva Tours ( Click here )
and Prometa ( Click here ).
Camiri
 3 / POP 31,000 / ELEV 825M
This town is the most southerly point on the vaguely defined ‘Che Trail’,
which ends in Vallegrande. However, Camiri’s real revolution occurred not
when Che passed through but in the 1990s, when this town of cobblestoned
streets became the center for the production of petroleum and gas for the
national oil company, YPFB (known more simply as ‘Yacimientos’). The
town is so proud of its oily role that it bills itself as the Capital Petrolífero
de Bolivia (Oil Capital of Bolivia).
Sights & Activities
Cuartel-Museo
( 9am-noon & 2-6pm Mon-Fri) Camiri was the site where the French
intellectual Régis Debray and Argentine artist Ciro Bustos, members of Che
Guevara´s guerilla group, were held and tortured following their capture.
Debray spilled the beans on Guevara’s operation and Bustos sketched the
group members for his captors. The site of their imprisonment was this
museum, then the local military barracks. Bustos’s original images are
displayed in the Cuartel’s ‘Casino’ – the site where, bizarrely enough,
LANDMARK
HOTEL
HOTEL
INTERNATIONAL
CHINESE
Debray was married, receiving a two-hour ‘permission’ for his nuptials
before returning to his cell. The two were tried and found guilty (what a
surprise!) in the local library.
YPFB Plant
Camiri is damn proud of its YPFB plant. There’s no formal tour, but if
you’re keen to visit get up at the crack of dawn and roll up at 8am and they
might let you look around. Don’t miss the Petrolero (Oil Worker)
monument in the middle of Av Petrolero.
Sleeping & Eating
All the places listed here are within two blocks of the main plaza.
Hotel JR $$
( 952-2200; Sánchez 247; s/d B$210/330; ) If you fancy hanging out
with oil barons check out the friendly JR, possibly named after the Dallas
soap character. All rooms have tele- phones, heating and cable TV, and
there’s a bright sitting area with fine views.
Hotel Premier $
( 952-2204; Busch 60; s/d B$120/150) A block from the plaza, this is a
nice modern hotel with small rooms, each with cable TV and hot shower.
Particularly nice are the bright and spacious upstairs rooms that open onto a
leafy patio.
Cupesi $$$
(Sánchez 247; mains B$45-70) Under the Hotel JR, this is arguably the best
food in town. The extensive menu contains meat, chicken and fish dishes
that are not cheap, but if you are in town for more than a few days it’s worth
the extra bolivianos to avoid succumbing to a monotonous diet of junk
food.
Membiray $$
(Plaza Principal; mains B$25-50) A brave attempt to introduce Chinese
and vegetarian dishes to the conservative town residents. Portions are large,
well cooked and the surroundings are pleasant – though there is nothing
Oriental about them.
Information
There is no official tourist information office, but local resident doña
Karen ( 952-4792) gives information by phone if you speak Spanish.
Getting There & Away
Camirí’s new bus terminal is outside of town on the road to Santa Cruz in
Barrio La Williams. Flotas leave every two hours or so to Santa Cruz
(B$30, five hours). If you are heading to Tarija, Yacuiba or Paraguay, the
quickest way to get there is to take a trufi to Villamontes (B$30, three
hours) and get a connection there. Andesbus and Emperador alternate for a
daily service to Sucre (B$100, 14 hours).
Top of section
     Includes »
     Santa Cruz
     Buena Vista
     Parque Nacional & Área de Uso Múltiple Amboró
     Samaipata
     Vallegrande
     La Higuera
     Gran Chiquitania
     Jesuit Missions Circuit
     Quijarro
Santa Cruz & Gran Chiquitania
Why Go?
The Bolivian Oriente is not what you generally see in Bolivian tourist
brochures. This tropical region, the country’s most prosperous, has a
palpable desire to differentiate itself from Bolivia’s traditional highland
image. The region’s agriculture boom in recent years brought about a rise in
income and a standard of living unequalled by any other Bolivian province.
Though Santa Cruz is Bolivia’s most populous city, it retains a small-town
atmosphere despite its cosmopolitan population. From here visit the
charming Jesuit mission towns with the country’s loveliest examples of
Jesuit architecture. Pre-Inca ruins hide near the small town of Samaipata;
revolutionaries make a pilgrimage to where Che Guevara met his maker on
the Che Trail around Vallegrande; and there are miles of trekking and tons of
wildlife at the little-disturbed Parque Nacional Amboró. If you want a look
into a part of Bolivia that defies the stereotype, this is the place to be.
When to Go
Jan Give in to desire at the Buena Vista Chocolate Festival on the last
Sunday in January.
May-Aug The best time to visit lowland Chiquitania to avoid the worst of
the heat.
Oct Join the faithful at Vallegrande’s Che Festival, in memory of the
legendary revolutionary.
Best Places to Eat
»Taj Mahal ( Click here )
»Yorimichi ( Click here )
»Naïs ( Click here )
»Latina Café ( Click here )
»La Casa del Telegrafista ( Click here )
Best Places to Stay
»El Pueblito ( Click here )
»Senses Boutique Hotel ( Click here )
»La Posada del Sol ( Click here )
»Gran Hotel Concepción ( Click here )
»Los Aventureros ( Click here )
Santa Cruz & Gran Chiquitania
Highlights
 Savor the international cuisine in cosmopolitan Santa Cruz (
Click here )
 Trek the still-untouched wilderness and spot rare wildlife at
Parque Nacional & Área de Uso Múltiple Amboró ( Click here )
 Explore the pre-Inca ruins of El Fuerte ( Click here ) in
Samaipata
 Get revolutionary on the Che Trail ( Click here ) in Vallegrande
and La Higuera
 Admire the restored architecture around the wonderful Jesuit
Missions Circuit ( Click here )
 Visit the breathtaking and remote sanctuary at Chochis ( Click
here )
 Ogle an endangered macaw at La Paraba Frente Roja Lodge (
Click here ) near Saipina
Climate
The Oriente’s climate is tropical but, because it occupies the transition zone
between the Amazon rainforest, the highlands and the dry Chaco plains,
Santa Cruz enjoys more sun and less stifling temperatures than the humid
Amazon Basin. Winter rainfall means little more than 10-minute downpours,
but a single summer deluge can last for days. At times during winter, surazos
(chilly winds) blow in from Patagonia and the Argentine pampas and the
temperature plummets.
National Parks
Parque Nacional Amboró is an unquestionable highlight of the region. The
remote Parque Nacional Kaa-Iya del Gran Chaco is Latin America’s largest
park but is largely inaccessible.
 Getting There & Away
Santa Cruz is the country’s most connected city. Many flights from Europe
and neighboring countries come direct to Santa Cruz and are worth
considering if you’re arriving from sea level and don’t want to spend days
acclimatizing in La Paz. Direct flights depart daily for Asunción, Buenos
Aires, Miami, São Paulo and Rio de Janeiro, as well as a comprehensive
network of domestic destinations.
Trains trundle south to Argentina and east to the Brazilian Pantanal, and
there are long-distance buses running along paved roads to the west and
south.
SANTA CRUZ & AROUND
Santa Cruz
 3 / POP 1.13 MILLION / ELEV 417M (1368FT)
Santa Cruz may surprise you with its small-town feeling, lack of high-rise
blocks and a lightly buzzing, relaxed tropical atmosphere. Bolivia’s largest
city oozes modernity yet clings stubbornly to tradition. The city center is
vibrant and thriving, its narrow streets crowded with suited businessmen
sipping chicha (fermented corn drink) at street stalls, while taxis jostle with
horses and carts for pole position at traffic lights. Locals still lounge on the
main square listening to camba (Eastern Lowlands) music, restaurants close
for siesta and little stores line the porch-fronted houses selling cheap, local
products.
This is not the Bolivia that you see on postcards, but this is the place with
the largest population diversity in the country – from the overall-wearing
Mennonites strolling the streets past local Goth kids, to a Japanese
community, Altiplano (High Plateau) immigrants, Cuban doctors, Brazilian
settlers, bearded Russians and fashionable cruceños (Santa Cruz locals)
cruising the tight streets in their SUVs. To help filter the ever increasing
traffic away from the center, the city is laid out in a series of concentric
circular avenues (anillos) that are joined by spoke-like thoroughfares
(radiales).
It’s worth spending a few days here, wandering the streets, eating at the
many international restaurants and checking out the rich kids’ play area,
Equipetrol, where nightlife is rife with naughtiness. Alternatively, join the
locals and chill out on the town square.
Santa Cruz
D5
D5
D3
D3
D5
C3
B4
C5
C3
G4
B5
E5
D5
D5
C4
F6
C4
C1
E4
E7
D7
D4
E5
D1
A1
E5
E5
D5
E4
 Top Sights
Museo de Arte Sagrado
 Sights 1 Basílica Menor de San Lorenzo 2 Museo Etno-Folklórico 3 Parque El Arenal 4 Plaza 24 de Septiembre
 Activities, Courses & Tours 5 Amboró Tours
 Sleeping 6 Alojamiento Santa Bárbara 7 Hotel Copacabana 8 Hotel Lido 9 Hotel Rio Magdalena
10 Hotel Sarah 11 Residencial Bolívar
12 Residencial Ikandire
13 Senses Boutique Hotel
 Eating
14 Alexander
15 El Aljibe
16 Hipermaxi
17 Ichiban
18 La Casona
19 Michelangelo’
s
20 Naturalia
21 Pizzería Marguerita
22
Vegetarian Center Cuerpomonte
23 Y Se Llama Peru
24
Yorimichi
 Drinking
25 Bar El Tapekuá
26 Clapton’s Blues Bar
27 Irish Pub
28 Kiwi’
s
D5
D2
C7
D5
D4
D4
B1
D4
E8
C4
B2
B3
F5
E5
(see 36)
D5
D4
G1
D8
D8
29 Lorca
 Entertainment
30 Eleguá
 Shopping
31 Artecampo
32 Los Amigos del Libro
33 Paseo Artesanal La Recova
 Information
34 Argentinian Consulate
35 Brazilian Consulate
36 Casa de Gobierno
37 Clínica Foianini
38 Farmacia América
39 Hospital Petrolero Centro Médico
40 Hospital San José de Dios
41 Infotur
42 Lavandería La Paz
Tourist Police
 Transport
43 Aerolíneas Argentinas
44 American Airlines
45 American Rent-a-Car
46 TAM
47 TAM Mercosur
History
Santa Cruz de la Sierra was founded in 1561 by Ñuflo de Chávez, a Spaniard
who hailed from present-day Paraguay. The town originated 220km east of
its current location, but in 1621, by order of the King of Spain, it moved to
its present position, 50km east of the Cordillera Oriental foothills. The
original location had proved too vulnerable to attack from local tribes. Ñuflo
himself was killed in 1568 at the hands of the mestizo Itatine tribe made up
of indigenous and Spanish settlers.
PLAZA
The city’s main purpose was to supply the rest of the colony with products
such as rice, cotton, sugar and fruit. Its prosperity lasted until the late 1800s,
when transportation routes opened up between La Paz and the Peruvian
coast, making imported goods cheaper than those hauled from Santa Cruz
over mule trails.
During the period leading up to Bolivia’s independence in 1825, the
eastern regions of the Spanish colonies were largely ignored. Although
agriculture was thriving around Santa Cruz, the Spanish remained intent
upon extracting every scrap of mineral wealth that could be squeezed from
the rich and more hospitable highlands.
In 1954 a highway linking Santa Cruz with other major centers was
completed and the city sprang back from its 100-year economic lull. The
completion of the railway line to Brazil in the mid-1950s opened trade routes
to the east, after which time tropical agriculture boomed and the city grew as
prosperously as crops such as oranges, sugar cane, bananas and coffee. That
growth continues to the present day.
The cruceños are an independent lot who feel little affinity for their
government in La Paz and are well aware of their city’s stock value as the
country’s trade and transport center. Support for President Morales is thin on
the ground here and cruceños voiced their overwhelming desire for the
region’s autonomy in 2006. Though they lost that battle following a national
referendum, calls for independence continue to be the main source of
inspiration for the city’s graffiti artists.
Sights & Activities
Santa Cruz is not the richest town when it comes to sightseeing. You’ll
probably spend most of your time here strolling around and sipping coffee in
one of the city’s many cafes.
Plaza 24 de Septiembre
Offline map Google map
The city’s main plaza serves as a lush tropical space where you’ll see locals
lounging on benches or strolling, camba bands banging out their tropical
rhythms and families bringing their kids to play. Once there were resident
jaywalking sloths here, but they were relocated to the zoo in an effort to
CHURCH
MUSEUM
PARK
MUSEUM
protect them from electrocution and increasing traffic hazards in the city
center.
Basílica Menor de San Lorenzo
Offline map Google map
(bell tower admission B$3; bell tower 8am-noon & 3-6pm Mon-Fri, 8amnoon Sat) Although the original cathedral on Plaza 24 de Septiembre was
founded in 1605, the present structure dates from 1845 and wasn’t
consecrated until 1915. Inside, the decorative woodwork on the ceiling and
silver plating around the altar are worth a look. There are good views of the
city from the bell tower.
Museo de Arte Sagrado
Offline map Google map
(Basílica Menor de San Lorenzo, Plaza 24 de Septiembre; admission B$10;
8:30am-noon & 2:30am-6pm Mon-Fri) The Museum of Holy Art, inside
the cathedral, displays a collection of religious icons, vestments and
medallions. More interesting are the many gold and silver relics from the
Jesuit Guarayos missions. Look out for one of the world’s smallest books, a
thumbnail-sized volume containing the Lord’s Prayer in several languages.
Parque El Arenal
Offline map Google map
Locals relax around the lagoon at Parque El Arenal, but it’s best not to
dawdle here at night. On an island in the lagoon, a bas-relief mural by
renowned Bolivian artist Lorgio Vaca depicts historic and modern-day
aspects of Santa Cruz.
 Museo Etno-Folklórico
Offline map Google map
( 342-9939; admission free; 8am-noon & 2:30am-6:30pm Mon-Fri)
Located at the entrance to the Parque El Arenal on Beni and 6 de Agosto is
the Museo Etno-Folklórico, which has a small collection of traditional art
ZOO
MUSEUM
SWIMMING
and artifacts from several camba cultures including Guaraní, Mojeño,
Ayoreo and Chiquitano.
Jardín Zoológico
( 342-9939; adult/child B$10/5; 9am-6:30pm) Santa Cruz’ zoo has a
collection of native birds, mammals and reptiles kept in pleasingly humane
conditions, although the llamas are a bit overdressed for the climate. If
you’re not into going to the jungle, this is a good place to see spectacular
species such as tapirs, pumas, jaguars and spectacled bears. Keep your eyes
open for free-ranging sloths and squirrel monkeys in the trees.
Take micro (minibus) 55 from Calle Vallegrande, 76 from Calle Santa
Bárbara or anything marked ‘Zoológico’. Taxis for up to four people cost
around B$15 from the center.
Museo Guaraní
(admission B$5; 8am-4pm Mon-Fri) A small but fascinating and
professionally presented exhibition of Guaraní culture. Look for the animal
masks and tinajas (huge clay pots) used for making chicha. You’ll need to
knock on the gate for entry.
Take micro 55 from Calle Vallegrande or 76 from Calle Santa Bárbara.
Aqualand
(half day B$35-50, full day B$50-70; 10am-6pm Thu-Sun May-Sep) For a
real splash, dive into this water park near Viru-Viru airport, north of the city
center. It can provide a welcome relief from the stifling muggy heat in the
city. The best way to get here is by taxi (around B$30).
BIOCENTRO GÜEMBE
A great place for a day out of Santa Cruz, Biocentro Güembe ( 370-0700;
www.biocentroguembe.com; Km 5, Camino Porongo, Zona Urubó; adult/child B$90/50) has a
butterfly farm, orchid exhibitions, 15 natural pools, sports facilities and you can go fishing and
TOUR
BIRDWATCHING
TOUR
THEATER
trekking in the surrounding forest. There’s a restaurant with international cuisine, so you won’t go
hungry, and cabins or camping if you wish to stay the night. Its a rough road out there, so the best
way to get here is by taxi from Santa Cruz; expect to pay around B$40. If it’s a hot day get there
early, the place fills up fast!
Tours
Numerous companies offer organized tours, but it’s hard to vouch for
quality, particularly for those with cheap rates. Those listed below all have
excellent reputations.
Amboró Tours
Offline map Google map
( 339-0600; www.amborotours.com; Libertad 417, 2nd fl) Trips to
Amboró national park and Jesuit missions.
Bird Bolivia
( 356-3636; www.birdbolivia.com) Professional birding and wildlife tours
with expert guides for those with a special interest in nature.
Misional Tours
( 360-1985; www.misionaltours.com; Los Motojobobos 2515) One of the
city’s best-organized and reliable operators, specializing in the Mission
Circuit but just as good for other attractions across Bolivia.
Festivals & Events
If you’re in Santa Cruz during Carnaval, you should most certainly head for
the paintball-plagued streets and join in the collective chaos. Carnaval
occurs annually in February or March, one week before Lent begins.
International Theater Festival
Theater groups from all over the world perform in venues around the city.
Held from April 14 to 24 (odd-numbered years only), it’s a great time to be
in Santa Cruz.
MUSIC
COMMERCIAL
BOUTIQUE HOTEL
HOSTEL
International Festival of Baroque Music
A 10-day festival, held from the end of April to the beginning of May, with
concerts in Santa Cruz and the Jesuit mission towns.
ExpoCruz
(www.fexpocruz.com.bo) Every year in mid- to late September, Santa Cruz
hosts this enormous two-week fair where you can buy anything from a
toothbrush or clothing to a new house, a combine harvester or a 20-ton truck.
Sleeping
Santa Cruz has a growing number of midrange hotels, all with private
bathrooms but many of the central places are fading ungracefully and are
overpriced. Many of Santa Cruz’ luxury options are away from the center
and are more like resorts than hotels.
Senses Boutique Hotel $$$
Offline map Google map
( 343-4793; www.sensesboutiquehotel.com; 24 de Septiembre cnr Sucre;
s/d/ste B$840/980/1330; ) Four restaurants and two bars may be
overkill, but you should prepare yourself for sensory overload at this
ultramodern boutique hotel. From the reception area with its half-ball chairs
and TVs in picture frames, right down to the luxurious rooms with king-size
beds and walk-in closets, the owners have come up with a concept designed
to challenge your idea of luxury by giving it a decidedly modern twist.
Los Aventureros $$
( 343-4793; www.losaventureros.net; Pedro Rivera Méndez btwn Beni &
Alemania; dm B$60, s/d B$120/200; ) Run by a couple of ex -
mochilleros (backpackers) from Sucre who have combined the experience of
their own world wanderings to create the ultimate hostel for the adventurous
independent traveler. A cool place to stay, this is a new breed of hostel
offering great-value rooms and little quirks such as Arabian tents for those
who like to sleep under the stars.
BOUTIQUE HOTEL
HOTEL
HOTEL
HOSTEL
HOSTEL
CasaPatio Hotel Boutique $$$
( 333-1728; www.casapatio-hotelboutique.com; Av Ibérica Calle 5, Las
Palmas; s/d B$400/580; ) This affordable boutique hotel is worth every
boliviano. The rooms have a delicate, understated appeal, as well as quirky
names such as the ‘No se lo digas a nadie habitación matrimonial ’ (‘Don´t
tell anybody matrimonial suite’). It offers use of a kitchen, which is handy
for the budget-minded traveler and of course the patio is exquisite.
Hotel Los Tajibos $$$
( 342-1000; www.lostajiboshotel.com; San Martín 455, Barrio Equipetrol;
s/d/ste B$1200/1350/2500; ) The facilities at Los Tajibos are top class
with rooms set in lush tropical gardens. Enjoy the nightclub, racquetball
courts and pool then relax with a massage in the health club.
Residencial Ikandire $$
Offline map Google map
( 339-3975; www.residencialikandire.com; Sucre 51; s/d/tr
B$160/200/270, without bathroom B$110/160/240; ) A converted colonial
house that retains a number of quaint original features, though the nauseainducing bedspreads in some rooms are not among them. That said, this new
place is excellent value and one of the best options in the center, being
located just half a block from the main plaza.
Residencial Bolívar $$
Offline map Google map
( 334-2500; Sucre 131; s/d B$200/240, without bathroom dm/s/d
B$80/110/170) It’s been in business since 1905 and is reputedly the city’s
oldest hotel. There are leafy tropical patios, a toucan snoozing on a branch
and clean, if small, rooms. You can laze in the hammocks or read in the
courtyard. Spanish lessons are available for guests and there is a kitchen for
guests to use.
Jodanga Backpackers Hostel $$
( 312-0033; www.jodanga.com; El Fuerte 1380, Zona Parque Urbano; dm
B$70-85, d B$220, without bathroom B$180; ) The ‘in’ place for
HOTEL
HOTEL
HOTEL
HOTEL
Santa Cruz backpackers, this superbly equipped hostel has a pool, jacuzzi,
pool table, free internet and seriously groovy, air-conditioned rooms, as well
as a party atmosphere inspired by its own bar. It also organizes great value
Spanish classes.
Hotel Rio Magdalena $$
Offline map Google map
( 339-3011; www.hotelriomagdalena.com; Arenales 653; dm B$90, s/d
B$140/180; ) A former Peace Corps hangout, this is a top-notch
midrange option with comfortable rooms, an inviting pool and a roof terrace
with glorious views of the city.
Hotel Lido $$
Offline map Google map
( 336-3555; www.lido-hotel.com; 21 de Mayo 527; s/d/tr B$315/385/490;
) A nice but relatively simple upmarket choice in the center, above a
Chinese restaurant, the Lido has comfortable rooms with TVs, and access to
laundry facilities. There’s also a weight-lifting gym for guests on the ground
floor.
Hotel Copacabana $$
Offline map Google map
( 336-2770; Junín 217; s/d/tr with air-con B$239/ 305/382, without aircon B$175/275/330; ) A strange sort of retro joint that will appeal to some
but be a turn-off for others. Dated, wood-paneled rooms with modern
bathrooms and cable TV compound the mixed messages sent by this place.
It’s about the best of the otherwise similarly uninspiring options along this
strip.
Hotel Sarah $$
Offline map Google map
( 332-2425; Sara 85; s/d B$125/190; ) Sarah has let herself go in recent
years, but is still fair value compared to some of the other hotels in this area.
Walls are adorned with jungle scenes to prepare you for any Amazonian
PENSION
INDIAN
INTERNATIONAL
JAPANESE
adventures that may lie ahead, but pick your room carefully as some are
falling to pieces.
Alojamiento Santa Bárbara $
Offline map Google map
( 332-1817; Santa Bárbara 151; s/d B$40/60) This is a low-key place with
a courtyard and bare rooms with hospital-like beds. It’s much loved by
backpackers and young Bolivians for being cheap and central.
Eating
The international population has rolled up its sleeves and opened some fine
restaurants, so what the city lacks in sightseeing it makes up in gastronomic
offerings.
Av Monseñor Rivero is lined with snazzy cafes and coffee shops that
seem to get trendier, or at least more expensive, the further along you walk
from the center of the city.
Taj Mahal $$$
(Bumberque 365; mains B$55-110) Hallelujah! It’s pretty hard to find an
Indian restaurant in South America, and even harder to find a good one, but
this upmarket curry house is a cut above the rest. Bangladeshi-owned
(despite the Taj Mahal images on the wall), the shrimp, chicken and lamb
dishes are mouth-wateringly good and portions are generous. It’s on a side
street behind Cinecenter.
Naïs $$
(Av Alemania; mains B$23-49) This Chilean-owned place serves a bit of
everything, from juicy grills with notable racks of ribs, to saucy chicken and
fine fish dishes. The food is reasonably priced and tasty, but what real- ly
sets this place apart is the superbly attentive service, effective without ever
being overbearing.
Yorimichi $$$
Offline map Google map
INTERNATIONAL
ARGENTINE
SEAFOOD
SUSHI
BOLIVIAN
(Av Busch 548; mains B$50-90; 11:30am-2:30pm & 6-11pm) A swish
Japanese restaurant with bamboo screens separating eating spaces and
traditional music tinkling from the speakers, this is the place to come for
brilliant sushi, sashimi, tempura and heart-warming sips of sake. It’s a
favorite of upmarket cruceños.
La Casona $$$
Offline map Google map
(www.bistrolacasona.com; Arenales 222; mains B$44-120; Mon-Sat)
This German-run splash of California gourmet has seating in a shady
courtyard or inside amid the colorful indigenous art that adorns the walls.
The food is diverse, with a variety of salads, German dishes or pasta in a
spicy, palate-tingling arrabiatta (spicy tomato sauce), but portions are small.
Los Hierros $$$
(Av Monseñor Rivero; mains B$40-80) Argentinian-style churrasquería
(grilled meat restaurant) that, according to locals, serves the best T-bone
steak in the country. Hanging on the wall is a rifle that supposedly once
belonged to Butch Cassidy.
Y Se Llama Peru $$$
Offline map Google map
(Av Monseñor Rivero; mains B$50-95) Adventurous seafood restaurant with
a huge variety of imaginative fish and shellfish dishes. Try the picante de
mariscos if you like your shellfish to come with a nip.
Ichiban $$$
Offline map Google map
(Libertad 899; mains B$35-70, sushi B$60-290) A Japanese-Peruvian sushi
bar where you can get a decent feed for a decent price. It takes the bar part
quite literally too, with an expansive wine list and dance music to
accompany your meal.
El Aljibe $$
BOLIVIAN
PIZZA
ITALIAN
VEGETARIAN
Offline map Google map
(Ñuflo de Chávez; mains B$35-45; noon-3am & 7-11:30pm Mon-Sat) An
atmospheric little restaurant in a cluttered old colonial house. It specializes
in comida típica (typical food) which is increasingly difficult to find in
cosmopolitan Santa Cruz.
Casa Típica de Camba $$
(www.casadelcamba.com; Mendoza 539; mains B$25-55) You are likely to
end up at this lively, sprawling landmark if you ask Bolivian friends where
to find the ‘most typical’ cruceño / camba experience. Juicy meat comes
sizzling off the grill while live singers holler traditional tunes and strawhatted waiters attend to your every need. Take micro 35 or 75 from the
center.
Pizzería Marguerita $$$
Offline map Google map
(north side of Plaza 24 de Septiembre; mains B$38-70) Long known for its
high-quality pizza, pasta and salads, and always popular with foreigners, this
well-located place on the north side of the plaza is good for a casual meal
though it gets a bit smoky inside.
Michelangelo’s $$$
Offline map Google map
(Chuquisaca 502; mains B$50-80) Located in a classy house, complete with
fireplaces and marble floors, this is a good choice for a romantic evening or
a little Italian self-indulgence.
Vegetarian Center Cuerpomonte $
Offline map Google map
(Aroma 64; buffet per kg B$25; 9am-6pm Mon-Sat; ) This place has a
buffet selection of basic and simple food including quinoa cake, mashed
sweet potato, salad bar goodies, veggie soups and lots of other wholesome,
healthy treats.
INTERNATIONAL
IRISH PUB
Alexander $$
Offline map Google map
(Junín; mains B$22-35) This is a haven for delicious breakfasts and good
coffee. Part of a chain, Alexander is excellent for sampling local Madidi
coffee and any range of breakfasts, including huevos rancheros (spicy
scrambled eggs) and gigantic fruit salads served with yogurt and honey.
Self-Catering
For a good variety of (relatively expensive) fixings to prepare meals
yourself, try minimart Hipermaxi Offline map Google map (cnr 21 de Mayo &
Florida). Supermercado Sur Fidalga (Plaza Blacutt) is the cheapest option
for groceries, but IC Norte (Av Busch at third anillo) is the biggest and best
supermarket in the city, selling all those foods you miss from home as well
as having an extensive food court. Naturalia Offline map Google map
(www.naturalia.com.bo; Independencia 452) organic grocery store has a
wide selection of locally produced healthy goodies and a small café.
Drinking
The hippest nightspots are along Av San Martin, between the second and
third anillos (rings) in Barrio Equipetrol, a B$10 to $B15 taxi ride from the
center. Hot spots change frequently so it’s best to dress to impress, cruise the
piranhar (strip; literally ‘to go piranha fishing’) and see what catches your
fancy. Cover charges run from B$20 to B$70 and drinks are expensive; most
places start selling drinks between 6pm and 9pm but don’t warm up until
11pm; they then continue until sunrise.
If you don’t want to pay entry fees to the discos, at weekends a young
beach crowd gathers with their cars at Río Pira’i during the day, banging out
unbelievably loud music from their gigantic car-boot speakers, while
drinking beer, dancing and chatting till late. The area is potentially unsafe at
other times though. Near the university, Av Busch is lined with places
catering to more serious, mostly male, drinkers with less ready cash.
Irish Pub
Offline map Google map
BAR
THEME BAR
LOUNGE
BAR
(Plaza 24 de Septiembre) On the east side of the plaza this place is
something of a second home to travelers in Santa Cruz, and has pricey beers,
delicious soups and comfort food plus tasty local specialties. It serves
breakfast, lunch and dinner, though most people while the hours away
drinking beer, relaxing and watching the goings-on in the plaza below.
Lorca
Offline map Google map
(Moreno 20; 8am-late) A meeting place for the city’s arty crowd and
those loving diversity, Lorca is one of the most innovative and happening
places in town. It’s perfect for a chilled caipirinha or mojito while you enjoy
the live music (B$20 cover). Before the music starts, short films are
screened. There is also an art gallery in the back, right next to the little
theater.
Clapton’s Blues Bar
Offline map Google map
(cnr Ballivián & Cochabamba; admission B$20; Sat & Sun) A dark jazzand-blues bar with local bands playing till very late to a sparse drinking
audience. There can be good jazz here (and very bad rock), so check what’s
playing by asking at the bar.
Bar El Tapekuá
Offline map Google map
(cnr La Paz & Ballivián; from 7:30pm Wed-Sat) This casual yet upscale
Swiss- and Bolivian-owned place serves good, earthy food and has live
music most nights (B$15 to B$20 cover).
Kiwi’s
Offline map Google map
(Bolívar 208; snacks B$28-46) A laid-back place where you can sip on
bebidas extremas served in 2L receptacles, or puff away on shisha (Arabic
flavored-tobacco pipes). Great snacks and sandwiches, too, all served with
their trademark papas kiwi.
CINEMA
PERFORMING ARTS
TRADITIONAL MUSIC
Entertainment
For movie schedules and other venues, see the daily newspapers El Mundo
and El Deber.
Cinecenter
( free phone 900-770077; cinema admission B$30-50) Modern mall with a
food court, trendy shops and a 12-screen US-style cinema that shows all the
latest Hollywood releases. This place has rapidly become the place to be
seen in Santa Cruz, to the detriment of a number of smaller cinemas and arthouses that have closed as a result.
Eleguá
Offline map Google map
(Libertad 651) During the week this is a Cuban cultural-center-cum-barcum-dance-school (it depends which day you visit!). At weekends it
metamorphoses into a groovy Latino disco where you can swing your thing
to the latest samba sounds.
El Rincón Salteño
(26 de Febrero, at Charagua; from 10pm Fri-Sun) Traditional peñas
(folk-music programs) are scarce in modern Santa Cruz, but this is an
excellent choice. Positioned on the second anillo, there’s a great variety of
musical styles, from Argentine guitarists to Cuban village drummers, local
singers and dancers in costume.
Shopping
Wood carvings made from the tropical hardwoods morado and the more
expensive guayacán (from B$150 for a nice piece) are unique to the Santa
Cruz area. Relief carvings on tari nuts are also interesting and make good,
portable souvenirs. Locals also make beautiful macramé llicas (root-fiber
bags).
Av René Moreno is a good place for souvenir shopping. Be aware that
prices are much higher here than in La Paz for llama and alpaca wool goods.
ARTS & CRAFTS
ARTS & CRAFTS
Artecampo
Offline map Google map
(Salvatierra 407; 9am-12:30pm & 3:30-7pm Mon-Sat, 9am-12:30pm
Sun) The best place to find fine artesanías (locally handcrafted items), this
store provides an outlet for the work of 1000 rural cruceña women and their
families. The truly inspired and innovative pieces include leatherwork,
hammocks, weavings, handmade paper, greeting cards and lovely naturalmaterial lamp shades.
Paseo Artesanal La Recova
Offline map Google map
(Libertad; 8am-8pm Mon-Sat) An alleyway packed with little stores
selling both authentic and fabricated handicrafts at reasonable prices.
Information
Roughly oval in shape, Santa Cruz is laid out in anillos (rings), which form
concentric circles around the city center, and radiales (spokes) that connect
the rings. Radial 1, the road to Viru-Viru airport, runs roughly north–south;
the radiales progress clockwise up to Radial 27.
Within the primer anillo, Junín is the street with the most banks, ATMs
and internet cafes, and Av René Moreno is lined with souvenir stores and
bars. To the northwest of the center, Av San Martin, otherwise known as
Barrio Equipetrol, is the main area for the party crowd, being full of bars and
clubs.
Dangers & Annoyances
Beware of bogus immigration officials and carefully check the credentials of
anyone who demands to see your passport or other ID. No real police officer
will ever ask to see your documents in the street; be especially wary of
‘civilian’ police who will most certainly turn out to be fraudsters.
Emergency
Tourist police Offline map Google map ( 800-140099; north side of Plaza 24
de Septiembre)
Immigration
Migración ( 333-2136; 8:30am-4:30pm Mon-Fri) Migración is north
of the center, opposite the zoo entrance. Visa extensions are available here.
The most reliable office is at Viru-Viru airport.
Internet Access
There are numerous internet places along Junín and wi-fi in all but the very
cheapest residenciales (simple accommodations), so you will have no
problem getting online.
Laundry
Efficient wash-and-dry places offer same-day service (with drop-off before
noon) for around B$12 per kilo including Lavandería La Paz Offline map
Google map (La Paz 42; Mon-Sat).
Medical Services
Clínica Foianini Offline map Google map ( 336-2211; Av Irala 468) Hospital
used by embassies, but be aware that some travelers have reported
unnecessary tests and being required to stay for longer than is strictly
necessary.
Clínica Japonesa ( 346-2038) On the third anillo, east side;
recommended for inexpensive and professional medical treatment.
Farmacia América Offline map Google map (Libertad 345) A good pharmacy;
efficient and inexpensive.
Money
Cash advances are available at most major banks, and ATMs line Junín and
most major intersections. The easiest place to change cash or traveler’s
checks (2% to 3% commission) is Casa de Cambio Alemán (east side of
Plaza 24 de Septiembre). Street money changers shout ‘ ¡Dolares!’ in your
face on the main plaza, but make sure you know the value of what you are
changing.
Post Office
Main post office (Junín; 8am-8pm Mon-Sat, 9-11:30am Sun)
Telephone
You can have fun using public telephone boxes which come in a variety of
shapes – anything from toucans to jaguars suspended mid-growl. Better rates
are found at phone centers, such as the main Entel office (Warnes 82), and
internet telecom stores along Bolívar that offer cheap international calls. The
Punto Entel (Bolívar) office near the plaza has landlines. Local cell-phone
rates are very cheap and chips already charged with credit can be bought at
Tonytel (Junín 320).
Tourist Information
Online information about the city of Santa Cruz and the main attractions of
the Oriente region can be found at www.santacruz-online.net.
Casa de Gobierno Offline map Google map ( 333-3248; Palacio Prefectural,
Plaza 24 de Septiembre; 8am-8pm Mon-Fri) A small information kiosk
on the north side of the plaza is good for quick inquiries, but has little or no
printed information.
Fundación Amigos de la Naturaleza (FAN; 355-6800; www.fan-bo.org;
Carretera a Samaipata, Km 7.5; 8am-4:30pm Mon-Thu, 8am-2pm Fri)
Though no longer in charge of the parks, FAN is still the best contact for
national parks information. It’s west of town (micro 44) off the old
Cochabamba road.
Infotur Offline map Google map ( 336-9681; Sucre; 8am-noon & 3-7pm)
Within the Museo de Arte Contemporáneo, this office is very well stocked
with information for the whole region and the rest of the country.
SERNAP (Servicio Nacional de Áreas Protegidas; www.sernap.gob.bo;
Calle 9 Oeste, Barrio Equipetrol) For information on national parks.
Getting There & Away
Air
Viru-Viru International Airport (VVI; 338-5000), 15km north of the
center, handles some domestic and most international flights. The smaller
Aeropuerto El Trompillo ( 351-1010), in the southeast of the city,
receives the majority of the domestic flights.
TAM Offline map Google map ( 353-2639) flies direct to La Paz daily,
stopping en route in Cochabamba from where there are connections to Sucre.
Flights to Tarija leave most days if there is sufficient demand and morning
flights to Trinidad depart four times a week. TAM Mercosur Offline map
Google map ( 339-1999; cnr of La Riva & Velasco) flies to Asunción every
day with connections to Buenos Aires, Santiago de Chile and several
Brazilian cities. Aerocon ( 351-1200; Aeropuerto El Trompillo) flies
several times daily to Trinidad with onward connections to Cobija and
Riberalta from El Trompillo airport.
American Airlines Offline map Google map ( 334-1314; Beni 167) flies
direct daily to Miami in the morning, with a second evening flight from
Thursday to Sunday. Aerolíneas Argentinas Offline map Google map ( 333-
9776; Junín 22) flies several times a week to Buenos Aires.
Bus, Micro & Shared Taxi
The full-service bimodal terminal ( 348-8482; terminal fee B$3), the
combined long-distance bus and train station, is 1.5km east of the center, just
before the third anillo at the end of Av Brasil.
The main part of the terminal is for flotas (long-distance buses) and the
train; on the other side of the tunnel is the micro (minibus) terminal for
regional services. International routes have offices at the left-hand end of the
main terminal as you enter. Most flotas leave in the morning before 10am
and in the evening after 6pm. Taking a series of connecting micros or taxis
can be a faster, if more complicated way, of reaching your destination, rather
than waiting all day for an evening flota.
To the Jesuit missions and Chiquitania, flotas leave in the morning and
early evening (7pm to 9pm). Micros run throughout the day, every two hours
or so, but only go as far as Concepción.
Smaller micros and trufis (collective taxis or minibuses that follow a set
route) to regional destinations in Santa Cruz department leave regularly from
outside the old bus terminal and less regularly from the micro platforms at
the bimodal terminal. To Buena Vista (B$23, two hours), they wait on
Izozog (Isoso), near the old bus terminal. To Samaipata (B$30, three hours),
trufis leave on the opposite side of Av Cañoto, about two blocks from the old
bus terminal. To Vallegrande (B$60, six hours) trufi departures are from the
Plazuela Oruro on the third anillo.
DESTINATION COST (B$) DURATION (HR)
Camiri 30 5-6
Cochabamba old road 54-110; new road 66-120 8-10
Concepción 35 7
La Paz old road 85-170; new road 95-180 15-23
Quijarro 70 12
San Javier 30 6
San José de Chiquitos 50 5
San Matías 150 20
Sucre 80-110 15-25
Tarija 90-115 24
Trinidad 53-125 8-10
Vallegrande 35 7-8
Yacuiba 51-110 15
Train
Trains depart from the bimodal terminal bound for Quijarro and Yacuiba.
For access to the platform you need to buy a platform ticket and show your
passport to the platform guard.
The rail service to Yacuiba on the Argentine border (via Villamontes; the
connection point for buses to Paraguay) departs at 3:30pm on Thursday
(B$47, 16½ hours) and returns on Friday at 5pm.
TRANS-CHIQUITANO TRAIN
No longer the harrowing journey that earned this line the nickname ‘Death Train,’ the route from
Santa Cruz to Quijarro via San José de Chiquitos and Roboré (for Santiago de Chiquitos) is now
plied by three different types of train. It’s a glorious journey through forest, scrub and Pantanal
teeming with wildlife, though you might be advised to take mosquito repellent. Most operate
cama (sleeper) and semi-cama classes with comfortable reclining seats.
The slowest and most frequent is the Tren Regional. It departs Santa Cruz Monday, Thursday
and Saturday at 11:45am, passing through San José de Chiquitos (semi-cama/cama B$23/53;
6:28pm), Roboré (B$34/77; 11:06pm) and arriving at Quijarro (B$52/115; 6:20am) the following
day. The return departs Quijarro on Monday, Wednesday and Friday at 11am, passing through
Roboré (5:57pm), San José de Chiquitos (11:08am) and arrives at Santa Cruz at 6:38am.
Next in line in terms of quality is the Expreso Oriental which operates a single comfortable
Super Pullman class. It departs Santa Cruz on Monday, Wednesday and Friday at 4pm, passing
through San José de Chiquitos (B$58; 9:50pm), Roboré (B$85; 1:47am) and arriving at Quijarro
(B$127; 8am) the following day. The return departs Quijarro on Tuesday, Thursday and Sunday
at 4pm, passing through Roboré (9:11pm), San José de Chiquitos (1:53am) and arrives at Santa
Cruz at 8am.
The fastest, comfiest and priciest is the Ferrobus. It departs Santa Cruz on Tuesday, Thursday
and Sunday at 6:30pm, passing through San José de Chiquitos (B$205; 11:39am), Roboré
(B$288; 2:58am) and arriving at Quijarro (B$257; 7:56am) the following day. The return departs
Quijarro on Monday, Wednesday and Friday at 6:30pm, passing through Roboré (11:24pm), San
José de Chiquitos (2:31am) and arrives at Santa Cruz at 7:55am.
There is rarely a problem getting a seat from Santa Cruz or Quijarro, but if joining the service
midway along the line then tickets are best bought in advance – only a limited number of seats
are allotted for these stations. Hot and cold food and drinks are available during daylight hours,
and a constant stream of vendors pass through the carriages selling all manner of goods.
Getting Around
To/From the Airport
Handy minibuses leave Viru-Viru for the center (B$3, 30 minutes) when
flights arrive, or take micros 40, 41, 42 and 55, which run between the
airport and the center. Micros to the airport leave every 20 minutes starting
at 5:30am from Av Cañoto at stops along the first anillo. Taxis for up to four
people cost B$70 from Viru-Viru or B$30 from the more central El
Trompillo.
To/From the Bus & Train Station
The bimodal bus-train station is beyond easy walking distance but micros 2,
4, 11, 41 and 85 run between the terminal and the center. Expect to pay B$10
per person for a taxi.
Bus
Santa Cruz’ system of city micros (B$1.70) connects the transportation
terminals and all the anillos with the center. Micros 17 and 18 circulate
around the first anillo. To reach Av San Martin in Barrio Equipetrol, take
micro 23 from anywhere on Vallegrande. A Guía de Micros documenting all
the city routes is available from bookstores and kiosks (B$25 to B$50).
Car
Most rent-a-car companies also have offices at the airport.
American Rent-a-Car Offline map Google map ( 333-7376; Av Suárez
Arana 3230)
Avis Rent-a-Car ( 343-3939; www.avis.com.bo; Carretera al Norte, Km
3.5)
Barron’s Rent-a-Car ( 342-1060; www.rentacarbolivia.com; Av Alemana
50)
Localiza Rent-a-Car ( 341-4343; www.localizabolivia.com; second anillo
cnr Beni)
Taxi
Taxis are very cheap but there is no rigid price structure. Typically the price
is higher if you are in a group, are carrying lots of luggage or wish to travel
after 10pm, and drivers will quote a fee that they consider fair for the
journey. If you think it is too much refuse and try the next one: there are
plenty to choose from. Typically a trip for one person within the first anillo
during the day is about B$10, rising to B$15 if you stray to the second
anillo. Agree on your price in advance to avoid arguments.
Buena Vista
 3 / POP 13,300
Despite the presence of two hulking cell-phone masts overlooking the plaza,
Buena Vista is a nice little town two hours (103km) northwest of Santa Cruz,
serving as an ideal staging point for trips into Parque Nacional Amboró’s
forested lowland section. Though most foreigners prefer Samaipata for
national park exploration, Buena Vista has some of the best places to view
wildlife, observe birds and see local traditions. The downside is a sweatier,
more humid climate.
Sights & Activities
CHURCH
OUTDOORS
CABIN
Iglesia de los Santos Desposorios
Buena Vista’s Jesuit mission was founded in 1694 as the fifth mission in the
Viceroyalty of Peru, but in its current form dates from 1767. When the
Jesuits were expelled from Bolivia later that year, the administration of the
church passed to the bishop of Santa Cruz. Although the building is
deteriorating, it has a lovely classic form, but you’d have to be a brave soul
to scale the precarious ladder to the bell tower for views of the plaza.
Río Surutú & El Cairo
Río Surutú is a popular excursion for locals, and there’s a pleasant sandy
beach ideal for picnics, swimming and camping during the dry season. From
Buena Vista it’s an easy 3km walk to the river bend nearest town. The
opposite bank is the boundary of Parque Nacional Amboró.
An even better swimming hole is near El Cairo, which is an hour’s walk
from town. To get there, head downhill from the plaza past the alcaldía
(town hall) and follow the unpaved road as it curves to the right. About 2km
from town, take the left fork and cross over a bridge. After passing El Cairo,
on your right, keep going until you reach the river.
Festivals & Events
The local fiesta, Día de los Santos Desposorios (26 November), features
bullfights, food stalls and general merrymaking. Culinary festivals include
the Chocolate Festival (last Sunday in January), the Coffee Festival (third
Sunday in April) and the Rice Festival (early May) after the harvest.
Sleeping
Hotel Flora & Fauna $$$
( 7104-3706; amboroadventures@hotmail.com; s/d all-inclusive
B$490/980) British ornithologist/entomologist Robin Clarke runs this
modern, utilitarian collection of cabins. Pluses include wildlife-viewing
platforms, an extensive book exchange and guided walks (for guests only)
from B$70. Access is by car/moto-taxi (B$20/15) from Buena Vista. Book in
advance.
RESORT
RESORT
PENSION
PENSION
INTERNATIONAL
Buena Vista Hotel $$
( 339-1080; www.buenavistahotel.com.bo; s/d/ste B$300/350/450; )
A glorious range of suites, cabins and rooms set in gorgeous gardens around
a refreshing pool. There is something for everyone in this, the best hotel
within walking distance of the center. The restaurant is top class, too.
Amboró Eco-Resort $$
( 932-2048, in Santa Cruz 3-342-2372; s/d/ste B$210/280/600; ) A
20-minute walk outside of town, this resort is surrounded by its own tropical
forest, complete with walking paths and fenced-in forest animals. Amenities
include a swim-up bar, a sauna and a disco. It’s not the world’s quietest
place, but it’s fun if you’re with children. The resort also operates Mataracú
Tent Camp.
La Casona $
( 932-2083; western cnr of plaza; s/d B$70/120, without bathroom per
person B$50) This is a colorful place on the plaza, with a friendly owner and
a nice patio with sagging hammocks. The rooms are decked out in pastel
shades, have good beds and a floor fan.
Residencial Nadia $
( 932-2049; Sevilla 186; s/d B$60/100) Just off the main square, the
spacious rooms at this family home surround a patio. There are firm beds
and the owner is a good source of park information. All rooms have fans.
Eating
A few places are dotted around the plaza, but given the proximity to the
national park you should boycott anything that offers wild game.
La Plaza $$$
(north side of plaza; mains B$38-80; closed Mon) By far the best eating
in town, La Plaza serves a variety of beef, fish and chicken dishes in rustic,
ranch house–style surroundings. This is a good place to pig out if you are
back from roughing it in the park.
La Cantina T MEXICAN ex Mex $$$
(north side of plaza; mains B$15-65) With its tacos and tequilas, this
wannabe Mexican bar is a little out of place in lazy Buena Vista, but the food
isn’t bad at all. There is a nightly happy hour from 7pm to 8pm but don’t
expect dancing on the tables.
Information
There is no tourist office at the time of writing but there is an extremely
useful online resource, www.buenavista.com.bo. For information on Parque
Nacional Amboró, visit SERNAP ( 932-2055; www.sernap.gob.bo;
7am-7pm), a block south of the plaza, where you can pick up an entry permit
and inquire about current park regulations and accommodations options if
you are lucky enough to find it manned.
There’s no bank or ATM here, so bring cash from elsewhere. If you are
desperate, a Moneygram office ( 8:30am-noon & 2:30-6pm Mon-Fri,
8:30am-noon Sat) on the street corner one block north of the plaza can wire
money from abroad. An acceptable internet connection is available at Punto
Viva (per hr B$4; 8am-10pm) just off the southwest corner of the plaza.
Getting There & Away
From Santa Cruz, shared taxis (B$23, two hours) leave for Yapacaní from
the micro side of the bimodal terminal and behind the old long-distance bus
terminal. Make it clear that you want to get off at Buena Vista. Returning
taxis cruise around the plaza with horns blaring in search of passengers.
Parque Nacional & Área de Uso
Múltiple Amboró
This 430,000-hectare park lies in a unique geographical position at the
confluence of three distinct ecosystems: the Amazon Basin, the Chaco and
the Andes.
The park was originally created in 1973 as the Reserva de Vida Silvestre
Germán Busch, with an area of 180,000 hectares. In 1984, due to the efforts
of British zoologist Robin Clarke and Bolivian biologist Noel Kempff
Mercado, it was given national park status and in 1990 was expanded to
630,000 hectares. In late 1995, however, amid controversy surrounding
campesino (subsistence farmer) colonization inside park boundaries, it was
pared down to its current size.
The park’s range of habitats means that both highland and lowland species
are found here. Mammals include elusive spectacled bears, jaguars, tapirs,
peccaries and various monkeys, while more than 800 species of birds have
been documented. The park is the stronghold of the endangered horned
curassow, known as the unicorn bird.
AMBORÓ COMMUNITY PROJECTS
The location of Parque Nacional Amboró is a mixed blessing; although it’s conveniently
accessible to visitors, it also lies practically within spitting distance of Santa Cruz and squarely
between the old and new Cochabamba–Santa Cruz highways. Considering that even the remote
parks of the Amazon Basin are coming under threat, Amboró feels ‘people pressure’ more than
most.
When Parque Nacional Amboró was created in 1973, its charter included a clause forbidding
settlement and resource exploitation. Unfortunately for naturalists and conservationists, hunters,
loggers and campesino (subsistence farmer) settlers continued to pour in – many of them
displaced from the Chapare region by the US Drug Enforcement Agency. By 1996, with conflicts
increasing over the park, it was redesignated as the Área de Uso Múltiple Amboró, which
effectively opened it up for settlement.
This reducing of the park’s protection status necessitated a change in tactics by local NGOs
and conservation groups keen to avoid the complete destruction of the natural treasures of the
region, but also fully aware of the needs of the human population. As a result, a number of
responsible and sustainable ‘community projects’ have sprung up in the area, using tourism as a
means of generating income for locals without them having to exploit their natural resources. The
following are some of the more interesting of these projects:
Candelaria Ecoalbergue ( 7100-6869; per person B$150) In the community of Candelaria
3km south of Buena Vista, this place manages comfortable four-person cabins and offers forest
walks in the surrounding area. Perhaps more interesting is the opportunity to observe local
craftsmen practicing the arts of weaving jipijapa and whittling tacuara (bamboo) into all manner
of useful objects.
Hacienda El Cafetal ( 935-2067; s/d Mon-Fri B$150/200, s/d Sat & Sun B$250/300, 5-
person cabañas B$500; ) Set up to support Bolivian coffee growers and their families; the
accommodations are good, with stylish, self-catering cabañas (cabins) and suites, all with good
views. You can go around the plantations and see how coffee is produced, taste different types of
the strong black stuff, and then, caffeine-pumped, ride horses and go bird-watching.
Refugio Volcánes ( 337-2042; www.refugiovolcanes.net; per person B$500) Ecofriendly
cabañas with hot showers in the breathtaking Los Volcánes region 4km off the Santa Cruz–
Samaipata road at Bermejo. Transportation from the road is offered, as well as guided hikes
through the wonderfully wild landscapes.
BUENA VISTA AREA
Access to the eastern part of the reserve requires crossing over the Río
Surutú, either in a vehicle or on foot. Depending on the rainfall and weather,
the river may be anywhere from knee- to waist-deep. Inexperienced hikers
should not attempt any of the treks in the park without a guide.
RÍO MACUÑUCU
The Río Macuñucu route is the most popular into the Área de Uso Múltiple
Amboró and begins at Las Cruces, 35km southeast of Buena Vista (taxi
B$30). From there it’s 7km to the Río Surutú, which you must drive or wade
across; just beyond the opposite bank you’ll reach Villa Amboró, where
there is a community-run campsite ( Adrian Rodríguez 7368-6784, Hugo
Rojas 7368-6784; per person B$150) with good facilities. Villagers may
charge an entrance fee to any tourist who passes their community en route to
Macuñucu, regardless of whether you intend to stay there or not – avoid
unpleasantness and pay.
From here a popular trek runs to the banks of the Río Macuñucu and
follows its course through thick forest. After four hours or so you pass
through a narrow canyon, which confines hikers to the river, and a little later
you’ll reach a large rock overhang accommodating up to 10 campers.
Beyond here the trek becomes increasingly difficult and the terrain more
rugged as you head toward some beautiful waterfalls and a second campsite.
Take a guide if doing the full hike.
RÍO ISAMA & CERRO AMBORÓ
The Río Isama route turns off at the village of Espejitos, 28km southeast of
Buena Vista, and provides access to the base of 1300m Cerro Amboró, the
bulbous peak for which the park is named. It’s possible to climb to the
summit, but it is a difficult trek and a guide is essential.
MATARACÚ
From near Yapacaní, on the main Cochabamba road, a 4WD track heads
south across the Río Yapacaní into the northern reaches of the Área de Uso
Múltiple Amboró and, after a rough 18km, rolls up to Amboró Eco-Resort’s
Mataracú Tent Camp ( 932-2048, in Santa Cruz 3-342-2372; per person
incl breakfast & lunch B$700), which has palm huts capped by thatched
roofs, and cabañas on stilts. There is also the community-run Posada Ecologica ( 7167-4582; dm B$35, d B$50), which offers all-you-can-eat meals
(breakfast/lunch B$10/15) and can be booked through any agency in Buena
Vista. This is the only SERNAP cabaña accessible by motor vehicle;
however, crossing the Río Yapacaní may be a problem except in the driest
part of the year.
SAMAIPATA AREA
Samaipata sits just outside the southern boundary of the Área de Uso
Múltiple Amboró and provides the best access point for the Andean section
of the park. There’s no real infrastructure, or any public facilities, in this
area.
The best guides to the region are available in Samaipata. The road uphill
from there ends at a small cabin, and then it’s a four-hour walk to a camping
spot near the boundary between the primary forest, giant ferns and Andean
cloud forest. From this point, you can continue an hour further into the park.
MAIRANA AREA
From Mairana, it’s 7km uphill along a walking track (or take a taxi) to La
Yunga, where there’s a community-run guest hut and a FAN office. It’s in a
particularly lush region of the Área de Uso Múltiple Amboró, surrounded by
tree ferns and other cloud-forest vegetation. From La Yunga, a 16km forest
traverse connects with the main road near Samaipata.
To enter the park here, visit the guard post at the south end of the soccer
field in La Yunga. Access to Mairana is by micro or taxi from Samaipata.
COMARAPA AREA
Northwest of Comarapa, 4km toward Cochabamba, is a little-used entrance
to the Área de Uso Múltiple Amboró. After the road crosses a pass between
a hill and a ridge with a telephone tower, look for the minor road turning off
to the northeast at the settlement of Khara Huasi. This road leads uphill to
verdant stands of cloud forest, which blanket the peaks.
Other worthwhile visits in this area include the 36-sided Pukara de
Tuquipaya, a set of pre-Inca ruins on the summit of Cerro Comanwara,
1.5km outside of Comarapa; and the colonial village of Pulquina Arriba,
several kilometers east of Comarapa.
Sleeping
Inside the park are five wilderness cabañas (around B$40 per person per
day). For bookings and information, contact SERNAP. The cabañas are very
basic, so you’ll need your own sleeping bag, food and drinking water. The
most popular and accessible cabaña is the one on the Río Macuñucu. It’s
4km upstream, with a sleeping loft and rudimentary cooking facilities. Other
cabañas can be found on the lower Río Semayo, above the Río Mataracú, on
the Río Agua Blanca and on the lower Río Saguayo.
Getting There & Away
By far the easiest and safest way to visit the park is by guided tour with one
of the recommended tour agencies in Santa Cruz. To do it yourself, a micro
heads south from Buena Vista through Huaytú, San Rafael de Amboró,
Espejitos, Santa Rosa de Amboró, Las Cruces and Santa Fé. This boundary
provides access to several rough routes and tracks that lead southwest into
the interior, following tributaries of the Río Surutú. To really probe into the
park though you will need a 4WD vehicle and a good deal of previous
experience in jungle trekking. Note that all access to the park along this road
will require a crossing of the Río Surutú.
Santa Cruz to Samaipata
The spectacular route from Santa Cruz to Samaipata passes a number of
attractions that are worth a brief stop. Any micro or trufi running this route
passes by the places of interest mentioned in this section.
Los Espejillos Community Project (admission B$5) has several
waterfalls and natural swimming pools, with lovely, clean and refreshing
water sparkling over the polished black rock that characterizes the area. It
stands across the Río Pira’i 18km north of the highway. Get off just beyond
San José and walk or hitch north along the 4WD track, following the
signposts. Basic accommodation is available at the Tacuaracú community
(per person B$20), which oversees the project.
Bermejo, 85km southwest of Santa Cruz, is marked by a hulking slab of
red rock known as El Portón del Diablo, which is flaking and chipping into
nascent natural arches. A great place to stay here is the pleasant
eco/agrotouristic organic farm Ginger’s Paradise ( 6777-4772;
www.gingersparadise.com; r per person, volunteer/full board B$70/100)
surrounded by virgin forest and run by an ex-rockstar. It’s a hit with birdwatchers, offers reductions for working volunteers and is famed for its home
grown organic meals.
Laguna Volcán is an intriguing crater lake 6km up the hill north of
Bermejo. A lovely walking track climbs from the lake to the crater rim; it
begins at the point directly across the lake from the end of the road. The
beautiful nearby region known as Los Volcánes features an otherworldly
landscape of tropical sugarloaf hills.
A turnoff to the community of Bella Vista, 100km from Santa Cruz on the
Samaipata road leads to the Codo de los Andes. In this dramatically
beautiful area famed for its giant ferns and monkey-tail cacti, there is great
trekking to be had, as well as an excellent community-run lodge ( 944-
6293; per person B$90, incl meals B$120).
Just 20km short of Samaipata lies Las Cuevas (admission B$10). If you
walk upstream on a clear path away from the road, you’ll reach two lovely
waterfalls that spill into eminently swimmable lagoons bordered by sandy
beaches. About 100m beyond here is a third waterfall, the biggest of the set.
You can also camp here for a small fee.
Samaipata
 3 / POP 9750 / ELEV 1650M (5413FT)
Samaipata has developed into one of the top gringo-trail spots over the last
few years. This sleepy village in the foothills of the Cordillera Oriental is
brimming with foreign-run, stylish hostels and restaurants. Visitors flock to
see the pre-Inca site of El Fuerte, some in search of a dose of the ancient
site’s supposed mystical energy, while increasingly it is the main jumpingoff point for forays to Parque Nacional Amboró. But it’s not just foreigners
who come up here; Samaipata is a popular weekend destination for
cruceños, too. The Quechua name, meaning ‘Rest in the Highlands,’ could
hardly be more appropriate.
C2
D2
C2
C2
D3
C2
C2
B1
C2
D2
B3
C2
D2
B3
C2
B3
C2
B3
D2
C2
S
a
m
a
i
p
a
t
a
 Sights 1 Museo Arqueológico
 Activities, Courses & Tours 2 Jukumari Tours 3 Michael Blendinger Tours 4 Roadrunners
 Sleeping 5 El Jardín 6 Hostal Andoriña 7 Hotel Siles 8 La Posada del Sol 9 Palacio del Ajedrez
10 Residencial Don Jorge
 Eating 11 La Chakana
12 La Ranita
13 Latina Café
14
Tierra Libre
15 Zentro Café Cultural
 Drinking
16 La Boéme
 Entertainment
17 Disco Ché Wilson
18 Melody
 Shopping
19 ASOPEC
20 Mucho Mundo
RUINS
Sights
El Fuerte
(admission B$50, guides per group of up to 6 B$75; 9am-5pm) The
mystical site of El Fuerte exudes such pulling power that visitors from all
over the world make their way to Samaipata just to climb the hill and see the
remains of this pre-Inca site.
Designated in 1998 as a Unesco World Heritage site, El Fuerte occupies a
hilltop about 10km from the village and offers breathtaking views across the
rugged transition zone between the Andes and low-lying areas further east.
There are two observation towers that allow visitors to view the ruins from
above. Allow at least two hours to fully explore the complex, and take
sunscreen and a hat with you. There is a kiosk with food and water next to
the ticket office.
First occupied by diverse ethnic groups as early as 2000 BC, it wasn’t
until 1470 AD that the Incas, the most famous tenants, first arrived. By the
time the Spanish came and looted the site in the 1600s it was already
deserted. The purpose of El Fuerte has long been debated, and there are
several theories. The conquistadors, in a distinctly combative frame of mind,
assumed the site had been used for defense, hence its Spanish name, ‘the
fort.’ In 1832 French naturalist Alcides d’Orbigny proclaimed that the pools
and parallel canals had been used for washing gold. In 1936 German
anthropologist Leo Pucher described it as an ancient temple to the serpent
and the jaguar; his theory, incorporating worship of the sun and moon, is
now the most accepted. Recently the place has gained a New Age following;
some have claimed that it was a take-off and landing ramp for ancient
spacecraft.
There are no standing buildings, but the remains of 500 dwellings have
been discovered in the immediate vicinity and ongoing excavation reveals
more every day. The main site, which is almost certainly of religious
significance, is a 100m-long stone slab with a variety of sculpted features:
seats, tables, a conference circle, troughs, tanks, conduits and hornecinos
(niches), which are believed to have held idols. A total of seven steps
leading up to the main temple represent the seven phases of the moon.
Zoomorphic designs on the slab include raised reliefs of pumas and jaguars
(representing power) and numerous serpents (representing fertility). Chicha
MUSEUM
ZOO
and blood were poured into the snake designs as an offering to Pachamama
(Mother Earth). Sadly, these designs are unprotected from the elements and
erosion is making them harder to discern with every passing year.
About 300m down an obscure track behind the main ruin is Chincana, a
sinister hole in the ground that appears all the more menacing by the
concealing vegetation and sloping ground around it. It’s almost certainly
natural, but three theories have emerged about how it might have been used:
that it served as a water-storage cistern; that it functioned as an escape-proof
prison; and that it was part of a subterranean communication system between
the main ruin and its immediate surroundings.
On the approach to the site look out for La Cabeza del Inca, apparently a
natural rock formation that bears a startling resemblance to the head of an
Inca Warrior, so much so that many insist it is a man-made project that was
abandoned halfway through. Watch too for condors soaring on thermals
overhead.
Taxis for the round-trip, including a two-hour stop at the ruins, charge
B$80 for up to four people from Samaipata. Better yet, taxi up and walk
back down. Gluttons for punishment who prefer to walk up should follow
the main highway back toward Santa Cruz for 3.5km and turn right at the
sign pointing uphill. From here it’s a scenic 5km to the summit. Guided tours
from Samaipata start from about B$100 per person.
Museo Arqueológico
Offline map Google map
(Bolívar; admission B$5; 8:30am-noon & 2-6pm Mon-Fri, 8:30am-4pm
Sat-Sun) Samaipata’s small archaeological museum makes an interesting
visit, but offers little explanation of El Fuerte. It does have a few Tiwanaku
artifacts and some local pottery. If you buy your admission to the ruins here
you get into the museum for free.
Zoo el Refugio
( 944-6169; admission B$20; 8am-6pm) This charming and responsible
little zoo is actually a refuge for rescued animals. The zoo accepts volunteers
who can lodge for free in exchange for their labor, and there is an attractive
wooded camping area if you fancy spending a night among the animals.
Horses are available for hire for B$25 per hour.
ECOTOUR
TOUR
TOUR
Tours
Several agencies organize trips to nearby attractions and almost every hotel
runs its own tours. Local taxi syndicates also run transportation to many of
the local attractions and rates are very reasonable, though not up for
negotiation.
Amboró Tours is the most established of the Santa Cruz–based agencies,
but the Samaipata office is open only sporadically.
Michael Blendinger Tours
Offline map Google map
( 944-6227; www.discoveringbolivia.com; Bolívar) The best for biologistrun orchid, birding and full-moon tours, offered in English and German.
Jukumari Tours
Offline map Google map
( 7262-7202; Bolívar) An excellent locally run agency; in addition to the
local attractions it offers packages to the Che Trail and the Jesuit Missions
Circuit.
Roadrunners guided
Offline map Google map
( 944-6294; Bolívar) Visit Olaf and Frank at German- and Englishspeaking Roadrunners for guided hikes to Amboró’s waterfalls, cloud forests
and El Fuerte.
Sleeping
You’re spoiled for choice when it comes to accommodations in Samaipata.
From basic dorms to lush campsites, rustic hostels and organic farms, it’s all
here. Excellent digs can be found in central hostels from around B$50 per
person. For cabins outside town ask at Michael Blendinger Tours for a series
of options to fit all budgets.
HOTEL
RESORT
RESORT
CABINS
La Posada del Sol $
Offline map Google map
( 7211-0628; www.laposadadelsol.net; Zona Barrio Nuevo; dm/s/d
B$60/120/140; ) With hotel quality and hostel prices this is the best value
in town. Modern, tastefully furnished en suite rooms have high-quality
Egyptian cotton sheets on every bed. Rooms are set around attractive
gardens and have spectacular views, and there’s a great new restaurant, the
Luna Verde. Owners Trent and Rosario have thought of everything, right
down to the close personal attention they offer guests. Three blocks uphill
north of the plaza.
El Pueblito $$$
( 944-6386; www.elpueblitoresort.com; s/d B$210/ 420; ) This four-star
resort is arranged like a little village complete with its own church and plaza.
Each room is uniquely styled after a village shop and positively dripping
with creativity. There’s a swimming pool (B$30 for nonguests), artesanía
shops and the resort is set on a hillside with marvelous views of Samaipata
in the valley below. There is even an excellent restaurant-bar, El Cabildo (
Thu-Sun).
Finca EcoTao $$
( 7462-6871; www.ecoato.org; per person incl full board B$150) On a
hillside 4km north of Samaipata, Finca EcoTao is a new ecotourism venture
designed to bring man closer to nature. Besides offering delightful
accommodation, it provides courses in skills as diverse as construction using
natural materials, organic agriculture and yoga, as well as volunteer
opportunities. Water filtration systems and solar panels ensure that your visit
has a minimal impact on the environment.
Finca La Víspera $
( 944-6082; www.lavispera.org; campsite with/without own tent B$30/40,
cabins per person B$55-80) This relaxing organic farm and retreat is a
lovely place on the outskirts of Samaipata. The owners rent horses (B$60 per
hour), run courses in esotericism and organize adventurous trips throughout
HOSTEL
HOSTEL
HOSTEL
CABINS
the region. The attractive rooms with communal kitchens, and four selfcontained guesthouses (for two to 12 people), enjoy commanding views
across the valley. Campsite includes hot showers and kitchen facilities. It’s
an easy 15-minute walk southwest of the plaza.
Hostal Andoriña $
Offline map Google map
( 944-6333; www.andorinasamaipata.com; Campero; dm/s/d
B$45/80/140) Cluttered but characterful, the house and rooms are painted in
earthy colors, the beds are comfy and the breakfasts (included in the price)
big and healthy. There’s a communal room downstairs, with a roaring fire in
winter and a mirador (lookout) on the top with great views of the valley,
plus a decent movie collection to while away rainy days.
El Jardín $
Offline map Google map
( 7311-9461; campsite/per person B$20/35, cupola room B$130) Hippystyle hangout squirreled away in a wild garden in the southeast corner of
town. Chilled music, basic digs and a relaxed scene for those who like to
take it easy. There is a kitchen for guest use and a pair of unique cupola
rooms if you can’t abide the idea of a room with corners.
Palacio del Ajedrez $
Offline map Google map
( 944-6196; Bolívar; s/d B$80/140; ) Home of the chess club that has
created Bolivia’s national chess champions. The rooms are reminiscent of
student halls, with modern furniture in oranges and blues, and there’s a small
swimming pool for guests to enjoy.
Cabañas de Traudi $
( 7263-1398; www.traudi.com; s/d B$70/140, cabins per person B$56-70;
) This amenable Austrian-run spread southwest of town has ample
manicured grounds. It’s set up for family-oriented recreation and the
swimming pool is open to nonguests for B$25 per person.
PENSION
PENSION
INTERNATIONAL
INTERNATIONAL
Residencial Don Jorge $
Offline map Google map
( 944-6086; Bolívar 20; s/d/tr B$50/100/150,  without bathroom
B$40/80/120) Minimalist whitewashed rooms, some with private bathroom
and cable TV, set around the standard shady courtyard liberally scattered
with hanging oropendola bird nests. Just a short stagger across the road from
the Latina Café.
Hotel Siles $
Offline map Google map
( 944-6408; Campero; s/d B$40/80, without bathroom B$30/60) This neat
and tidy little hostel even throws in a basic breakfast for the price. Rooms
are simple but well kept and there is even the use of a communal kitchen for
those who prefer to cook for themselves.
Eating & Drinking
The cosmopolitan crowd in Samaipata ensures that good eating is never far
away. Besides the inventive and frequently excellent hotel restaurants such
as Luna Verde at Posada del Sol ( Click here ), El Cabildo at El Pueblito (
Click here ) and the renowned vegan slow food at La Víspera’s Garden Café
( Click here ), the following are all good.
Latina Café $$
Offline map Google map
(Bolívar 3; mains B$30-60; dinner Mon-Fri, lunch & dinner Sat & Sun)
This bar-restaurant serves some of the best food in town: juicy steaks, saucy
pastas, vegetarian delights and gorgeous brownies. The lighting is intimate
and the sunsets beautiful. For a real treat try the steak in coca sauce. Happy
hour is from 6pm to 7pm.
Tierra Libre $$$
Offline map Google map
(Sucre 70; mains B$29-62) This place is loved by backpackers for its ample
and affordable eats. Top-notch dishes from around the globe are served in a
VEGETARIAN
TEAHOUSE
VEGETARIAN
INTERNATIONAL
BAR
bohemian setting. Veggie meals and exotic Indian concoctions are among the
treats on offer and you shouldn’t miss the succulent lomito (steak sandwich)
or tasty Lake Titicaca trout.
Zentro Café Cultural $
Offline map Google map
(Bolívar; mains B$15-30; 8am-2pm & 5-9pm Wed-Sun) Tasty meatless
plates will set you up nicely for one of the activities in this cultural center,
where you can partake in anything from reflexology and yoga, to dance
classes or massage.
La Ranita $
Offline map Google map
(Estudiante; snacks B$6-18; 8am-12.30pm & 3.30-7pm Mon-Sat)
Inventive breakfast combos and fresh bread and pastries are on offer in this
superb, French-style teahouse.
Asano $
( lunch Tue-Sun) Along the road to Finca La Víspera, this Japanese
religious sect sells organic vegetables fertilized with divine light. For under
B$10 you can be blessed with the ‘energy’ of the Mahikari Luz Divina – go
on, don’t be shy.
La Chakana $$$
Offline map Google map
(Plaza 15 de Diciembre; mains B$30-70) The long-established Chakana, on
the west side of the plaza, serves reasonably priced breakfasts, sandwiches,
vegetarian meals, excellent pizzas, homemade sweets, cocktails and
European specialties. The drawback is the surly and lethargic service.
La Boéme
Offline map Google map
(south side of plaza; 3pm-2am Wed-Mon) A bumping little bar on the
corner of the plaza, this is just what Samaipata’s nightlife has been lacking.
There’s a wide selection of intoxicating cocktails and, if you get the
munchies, a chalkboard snack menu that changes daily.
Entertainment
A slice of Santa Cruz teenage nightlife is transported to Samaipata each
weekend and revived at the popular Disco Ché Wilson Offline map Google map
(Bolívar). Alternatively try Melody Offline map Google map , a block southwest
from the plaza, which has regular live shows. At least once a month there is
a live open-air disco at El Jardín, where rock and salsa play to a mixed, and
largely inebriated, crowd.
Shopping
The market is open on Saturday and Sunday. ASOPEC Offline map
Google map (Asociación de Productoras Ecológicas; 2-6pm Mon-Fri)
offers artesanías, produced and sold by Bolivian women from local
communities, with all proceeds going to the makers. Wool, ceramics, soap,
candles and even ice cream are on offer. Mucho Mundo Offline map
Google map (Bolívar) sells all kinds of bric-a-brac designed by a group of
resident artists.
Information
There are no banks or ATMs in Samaipata so it’s best to bring cash. Or draw
cash on a credit card with your passport from the Co-operativa Merced just
off the main plaza on Calle Sucre.
There is no official tourist office, though many tour companies and hostels
can help you with information about the local sites. For reliably unbiased
advice check out Samaipata’s excellent tourist website www.samaipata.info.
SERNAP (www.sernap.gob.bo) has an office 1km outside of town on the
road to Santa Cruz.
The best internet connection is at Anyi (Campero; per hr B$4), one block
east of the plaza.
Getting There & Around
Trufis run throughout the day when full between Santa Cruz and Samaipata (
 333-5067; B$30, three hours). From Santa Cruz, services leave from the
corner of Av Omar Chavez Ortíz and Solis de Olguin a few blocks from the
old terminal. From Sampaipata, services depart from the main plaza.
Finding a lift west to Vallegrande or Cochabamba is a bit trickier. For
Vallegrande, buses pass the gas station on the main road at 11am and 4pm
and typically have seats, while for Cochabamba services on the old road
leave Mairana around 3pm on Tuesday, Friday and Sunday. To take the new
road to Cochabamba it’s easiest to just head back to Santa Cruz and catch a
flota there.
Around Samaipata
LA PAJCHA
A series of three beautiful waterfalls on a turbid mountain river that plunge
45m into a dreamy tropical lagoon. La Pajcha has a sandy beach for
swimming and some inviting campsites. It’s 42km south of Samaipata,
toward San Juan, where there is a turnoff that leads 7km to the falls. The site
is privately owned and visitors are charged B$10 to visit and swim here. The
easiest way to get here is in a shared taxi from the plaza in Samaipata
(B$250, two hours).
EL NIDO DE LOS CONDORES
El Nido de los Condores (Condor Nest) is the end point of a hugely popular
eight-hour hike that begins from the trailhead near La Pajcha. Here, as you
might expect, you will find more than 25 condor nests perched precariously
on the hillside and have the opportunity to admire these glorious birds at
close quarters as they soar on thermals over the valley below. The site has
been dubbed the best condor-watching place in South America.
MUSEUM
LA PARABA FRENTE ROJA
The endangered red-fronted macaw (Ara rubrogenys), known locally as la paraba frente roja,
reflects its Bolivian specialty status in its red, green and yellow plumage – the colors of the
national flag. Found only in dry inter-Andean valleys in the Valle- grande area, this handsome
bird has a world population of just 1000. Thanks to an extensive public awareness campaign,
local conservation NGO Armonía was able to raise the funds to purchase a small reserve close to
the town of Saipina that is dedicated to the conservation of the bird. It has now constructed a
superb and comfortable lodge (incl full board B$490) as a means of sustainably supporting the
reserve.
Visit the Armonía office Offline map Google map ( 356-8808; www.armonia-bo.org;
Lomas de Arenas 400; 8:30am-12:30pm & 2:30-6pm Mon-Fri) in Santa Cruz for more
information about its conservation programs and how to visit the lodge. For a guided birding tour
contact Bird Bolivia ( Click here ).
Vallegrande
 3 / POP 16,850 / ELEV 2100M (6890FT)
Vallegrande’s claim to fame is that it was the spot where Che Guevara’s
emaciated corpse was exhibited before its burial, and it is the main base for
the Che Trail, a community-based tourism project. Che’s final movements
are followed on the trail on foot, mule, bicycle and boat, with rustic
accommodations available at encampments and with local families.
Most visitors to the town are passing through on a Che pilgrimage, but
Vallegrande is also a nice spot to relax and walk in the hills. It’s a quiet little
town set in the Andean foothills and enjoys a lovely temperate climate.
Sights
Museo Ruta del Che & Museo Arqueólogico
(admission B$10; 8am-noon & 2-6pm Mon-Sun) On the 2nd floor is a
photo-documentary of events leading up to the capture of Che, featuring
objects and artefacts that belonged to the guerrilla group. A small
archaeological museum, mainly of ceramics, is on the ground floor.
LANDMARK
MUSEUM
FOLK
Hospital Señor de la Malta
After Che Guevara’s execution in La Higuera, south of Vallegrande, his
body was brought to the now-dilapidated hospital laundry here. The hospital
still functions, but the laundry itself has now been cordoned off as a
pilgrimage site, where graffiti pays homage to this controversial figure. To
get here, head one block south of the plaza along Escalante, and then five
blocks east along Malta.
El Mausoleo del Che
In 1997, nearly 30 years after Che’s death, one of the soldiers who carried
out the burial revealed that his body lay beneath Vallegrande’s airstrip. The
Bolivian and Cuban governments called for his exhumation and Che was
officially reburied in Santa Clara, Cuba, on October 17, 1997. The spot
where he was originally buried is marked by a mausoleum adorned with the
typical smiling image of Che that beams out across the valley. The interior
can only be visited by guided tour, but the building is clearly visible from the
bus station.
Festivals & Events
The weekly feria (market) is held every Sunday. Around February 23 the
town marks its anniversary with various sporting and cultural events.
Che Guevara Festival
Since the bodies of Che and several of his comrades were recovered from
the airport in 1997, the town has celebrated an annual Che Guevara festival
in October, featuring folk art and cultural activities.
HASTA SIEMPRE, COMANDANTE
As you travel around Bolivia, the iconic image of Che – the revolutionary with a popularity status
reached only by rock stars, and remembered in Cuban songs such as ‘Hasta siempre,
Comandante’ (Forever with You, Commander) – will be staring at you from various walls,
paintings, posters and carvings. Bolivia is where Che went to his death and where his image is
being fervently resurrected.
Fresh from revolutionary success in Cuba (and frustrating failure in the Congo), Ernesto ‘Che’
Guevara de la Serna was in search of a new project when he heard about the oppression of the
working classes by dictator René Barrientos Ortuño’s military government in Bolivia.
Strategically located at the heart of South America, Bolivia seemed like the perfect place from
which to launch the socialist revolution on the continent. Though Fidel Castro had required him
to sign a letter of resignation upon leaving Cuba, thereby publically distancing the Cuban
government from Guevara’s activities, the two remained in close contact throughout the Bolivian
escapade.
Che’s Bolivian base was established in 1966 at the farm Ñancahuazú, 250km southwest of
Santa Cruz. Initially his co-revolutionaries had no idea who he was, and only when his trademark
beard began to grow back (he had shaved it off to arrive incognito in Bolivia) did they realize that
they were in the presence of a living legend. Che hoped to convince the campesinos (subsistence
farmers) that they were oppressed, and to inspire them to social rebellion, but was surprised to be
met only with suspicion. In fact a cunning move by Ortuño to grant campesinos rights to their
land had guaranteed their support and all but doomed Che’s revolution to failure before it had
even begun.
Bolivian Diary was written by Che during the final months of his life. Originally planned as a
first-hand documentation of the revolution, it reads as a somewhat leisurely adventure. Despite
occasional minor setbacks Che considered things to be moving along nicely and in his last entry
on October 7, 1967, 11 months after his arrival in Bolivia, he writes that the plan was proceeding
‘without complications.’
The following day he was captured near La Higuera by CIA-trained Bolivian troops under the
command of Capitán Gary Prado Salmón, receiving bullet wounds to the legs, neck and shoulder.
He was taken to a schoolroom in La Higuera and, just after noon on October 9, he was executed
in a flurry of bullets fired by Sergeant Mario Terán, who had asked for the job following the
death of several of his close friends in gun fights with the guerillas. Once the deed was done the
assassins were said to be perturbed by the open eyes and peaceful smile on the dead
revolutionary’s face.
The body was flown to Vallegrande, where it was displayed in the hospital laundry room to
prove to the whole world that ‘El Che’ was finally dead. Local women noted an uncanny
resemblance to the Catholic Christ and took locks of his hair as mementos, while the untimely
deaths of many of those involved in his capture and assassination has led to widespread belief in
the ‘Curse of Che,’ a sort of Tutankhamen-style beyond-the-grave retribution.
Almost 40 years later the socialist revolution finally arrived in Bolivia, via the ballot and not
the bullet, with the election of Evo Morales Ayma. The country that executed Che now officially
embraces him as a hero, and celebrated his time in Bolivia with the establishment of the Che
Trail, a community-based tourism project that traces his last movements. Somewhat vaguely
defined, the trail begins in distant Camiri (the southernmost point), though it’s quite a trek on to
the sites of real interest which are clustered in the area immediately around Vallegrande.
Sleeping & Eating
HOTEL
HOTEL
CHINESE
INTERNATIONAL
Vallegrande has a fair number of basic, budget hostelries, so while you’re
unlikely to be without a bed, you are likely to be without a private bathroom.
Budget options in the street around the plaza all charge around B$30 for
very similar rooms with shared bathroom.
Plaza Pueblo Hotel $
( 942-2630; Virrey Mendoza 132; s/d B$80/160) Two and a half blocks
uphill from the market, this brand-new hotel is surprisingly upmarket for the
price. OK, at the time of writing it was still only half operational, but with
spiffing bathrooms and an on-site restaurant it’s already looking like the best
value in town.
Hostal Juanita $
( 942-2231; Manuel María Caballero 123; s/d B$80/140) This is a clean,
family-run hotel just two blocks from the main square where you get decent
value for money and a flowery courtyard with fountain.
La Nueva China $$$
(Florida; mains B$30-70) Somewhat less than authentic Chinese food
picked from a menu that hangs on the wall. It’s Bolivian-owned and while
your food might not look or taste exactly as you expected, keep an open
mind and you’ll conclude that different doesn’t necessarily mean bad!
El Mirador $$$
( 942-2341; El Pichacu; mains B$40-80) Literally the top spot in town,
with excellent views, and good fish and meat dishes.
Information
A tourist office next to the museum on the east side of the plaza provides
information on the Che Trail as well as offering guided tours with local Che
expert Gonzalo Flores Guzmán ( 7318-6354). Tours start from B$200
per person for a group of four, or B$450 for a single person for a full day. An
interesting aspect of the tour is the chance to chat with people who actually
met Che to get a first-hand account of events. There is also a decent Spanish
language municipal website with tourist information:
www.vivirenvallegrande.com.
Getting There & Away
From Plazuela Oruro in Santa Cruz trufis leave for Vallegrande (B$60, five
hours) when full. Flotas (B$35, seven hours) from the bimodal terminal
leave mainly in the morning, From Samaipata, micros leave from the main
road at 11am and 4pm (three hours), or if you are in a group you can haggle
for a shared taxi; expect to pay around B$300 for a car load.
Vallegrande’s bus terminal, 1km north of the center, looks impressive, but
very few services actually run from there. There are micros to Santa Cruz at
8am and 1pm and several between 9pm and 10pm, and a 6pm service to
Cochabamba. Trufis to Samaipata and Santa Cruz also leave from here when
full, though it is frequently a long wait. The bus between Santa Cruz and
Sucre passes through Vallegrande between 1pm and 4pm every day except
Monday, continuing on to Pucará from where it’s a pleasant 15km walk to
La Higuera or else a good place to negotiate with a taxi driver. Taxis to La
Higuera (B$300, three hours – try haggling) depart from the market, two
blocks east of the main plaza along Sucre.
La Higuera
The isolated town of La Higuera is where Che Guevara was held prisoner
following his capture. An oversized bust of the revolutionary lords over the
dusty Plaza del Che, while the Boina del Che monument is a replica of the
famous star design that once adorned his beret. A full body cement statue of
Che at twice life size completes the set. The schoolroom where Che was
kept before being executed is just off the plaza with a star monument in
front. It is now a museum (admission B$10), though the building has
unfortunately been altered from its original design.
PENSION
PENSION
Sleeping & Eating
La Casa del Telegrafista $
( 7493-7807; www.lacasadeltelegrafista.com; s/d B$50/100) Offers
vegetarian lunches and rustic rooms in a historic house with all electricity
provided by solar panels. It also arranges Che tours.
Los Amigos $
( 7268-4879; s/d B$50/100; ) French-run pension has simple rooms with
furniture made by the owners and a recommended restaurant (mains B$35-
60) using vegetables grown in the garden.
GRAN CHIQUITANIA
The Gran Chiquitania is the area to the east of Santa Cruz where the hostile,
thorny Chaco and the low, tropical savannas of the Amazon Basin have a
stand-off. Watched by the foothills of the Cordillera Oriental to the west,
the Llanos de Guarayos to the north and the international boundaries of
Paraguay and Brazil to the south and east, these two vastly different
landscapes stand together, never making peace.
The flat landscapes of the Chiquitania are broken and divided by long,
low ridges and odd monolithic mountains. Much of the territory lies
soaking under vast marshes, part of the magnificent Pantanal region. Bisected by the railway line, it’s also the area of Jesuit mission towns with
their wide-roofed churches and fascinating history.
The region takes its name from the indigenous Chiquitanos, one of
several tribes that inhabit the area. The name Chiquitanos (meaning ‘little
people’) was coined by the Spanish who were surprised by the low
doorways to their dwellings.
History
In the days before eastern Bolivia was surveyed, the Jesuits established an
autonomous religious state in Paraguay in 1609. From there they fanned
outward, founding missions in neighboring Argentina, Brazil and Bolivia
and venturing into territories previously unexplored by other Europeans.
Keen to coexist with the numerous indigenous tribes of the region, the
Jesuits established what they considered an ideal community hierarchy:
each settlement, known as a reducción, was headed by two or three Jesuit
priests, and a self-directed military unit was attached to each one, forming
an autonomous theocracy. For a time the Jesuit armies were the strongest
and best trained on the continent. This makeshift military force served as a
shield for the area from both the Portuguese in Brazil and the Spanish to the
west.
Politically, the reducciones were under the nominal control of the
audiencia (judicial district) of Chacras, and ecclesiastically under the
bishop of Santa Cruz, though their relative isolation meant that the
reducciones basically ran themselves. Internally, the settlements were
jointly administered by a few priests and a council of eight indigenous
representatives of the specific tribes who met daily to monitor community
progress. Though the indigenous population was supposedly free to choose
whether it lived within the missionary communities, the reality was that
those who chose not to were forced to live under the harsh encomienda
(Spanish feudal system) or, worse still, in outright slavery.
The Jesuit settlements reached their peak under the untiring Swiss priest
Father Martin Schmidt, who not only built the missions at San Xavier,
Concepción and San Rafael de Velasco, but also designed many of the
altars, created the musical instruments, acted as the chief composer for the
reducciones and published a Spanish-Chiquitano dictionary. He was later
expelled from the region and died in Europe in 1772.
By the mid-1700s, political strife in Europe had escalated into a power
struggle between the Catholic Church and the governments of France, Spain
and Portugal. When the Spanish realized the extent of Jesuit wealth and
influence they decided to act. In 1767, swept up in a whirlwind of political
babble and religious dogma, the missions were disbanded and King Carlos
III signed the Order of Expulsion, which evicted the Jesuits from the
continent. In the wake of the Jesuit departure the settlements fell into
decline, their amazing churches standing as mute testimony to their
achievements.
Jesuit Missions Circuit
The seven-town region of Las Misiones Jesuíticas hides some of Bolivia’s
richest cultural and historic accomplishments. Forgotten by the world for
more than two centuries, the region and its history captivated the world’s
imagination when the 1986 Palme d’Or winner The Mission spectacularly
replayed the last days of the Jesuit priests in the region (with Robert de Niro
at the helm). The growing interest in the unique synthesis of Jesuit and
native Chiquitano culture in the South American interior resulted in Unesco
declaring the region a World Heritage site in 1991. Thanks to 25 years of
painstaking restoration work, directed by the late architect Hans Roth, the
centuries-old mission churches have been restored to their original splendor.
To travel through the entire circuit takes five or six days, but for those
with an interest in architecture or history, it’s a rewarding excursion. If you
have less time on your hands, prioritize the two most accessible churches at
San José de Chiquitos and Concépcion, which are also conveniently the
most representative of the extremes of styles.
Information
The major mission towns all now have well-stocked Infotur offices, but for
online information about the Gran Chiquitania region and the mission
circuits, see www.chiquitania.com.
Getting There & Away
If you wish to travel the mission circuit on public transport, the bus
schedules synchronize better going counterclockwise: that is starting the
circuit at San José de Chiquitos. Traveling the opposite way,
unsynchronized and irregular bus schedules make for a frustrating journey.
A much less time-consuming way of doing it is by taking a guided tour
from Santa Cruz, which costs around US$450 for a four-day package taking
in all the major towns. Misional Tours is a recommended operator.
SAN JAVIER
 3 / POP 11,300
The first (or last, depending on which way you travel) settlement on the
circuit, San Javier, founded in 1691, is the oldest mission town in the
region. It’s also a favorite holiday destination for wealthy cruceño families.
Swiss priest Martin Schmidt arrived in 1730 and founded the region’s first
music school and a workshop to produce violins, harps and harpsichords.
He also designed the present church, which was constructed between 1749
and 1752. It sits on a lovely forested ridge with a great view over the
surrounding low hills and countryside. Restoration work was completed in
1992 to beautiful effect, and the newly restored building manages to appear
pleasantly old and authentic.
HOTEL
PENSION
PENSION
BOLIVIAN
San Javier has some inviting hot springs 13km northwest of town along
a rough road (B$150 return in a taxi). A further 5km along is a natural pool
and waterfall, Los Tumbos de Suruquizo, where you can enjoy a
refreshing swim. There is also a small free Museo Misional ( 9am-noon
& 2-6pm Mon-Fri) with the emphasis on musical instruments, and on the
northeast corner of the plaza the Museo Casa Natal German Busch (
9am-noon & 2-6pm Mon-Fri) is in the former home of the ex-Bolivian
president and Chaco War hero who died in mysterious circumstances aged
just 35.
 Sleeping & Eating
The following are all on the main plaza or, like everything in town, just a
stone’s throw away.
Hotel Momoqui $$
( 7603-1326; s/d/tr B$200/400/500; ) The choice of wealthy
cruceños who enjoy the private pool and buffet restaurant, all a cut above
the other options in town.
Residencial Amé-Tauná $
( 963-5018; dm B$50, s/d/tr B$100/150/210) A typical mission circuit
lodging on the main plaza, with Chiquitano-ornamented rooms arranged
around little green patios.
Residencial de Chiquitano $
( 963-5171; s/d B$65/120, s/d without cable TV or fan B$45/80; ) On
the main road a little way up from the bus stop this is a clean and bright
hostel on two floors decorated with toucan and macaw motifs. Ask for room
16 or 17 for killer views of the surrounding hills, but don’t even think of
getting a room without a fan unless it’s cold outside.
El Ganadero $
(mains B$20-30) Half-decent home-cooked meals and a good-value
almuerzo (set lunch, B$20), but the uncooperative service will have you
BOLIVIAN
CHURCH
rushing to finish.
Pascana $
(mains B$20-25) The food is home cooked and good value and the family
atmosphere and smiling waiters make all the difference.
 Getting There & Away
All Santa Cruz–Concepción buses pass through San Javier (B$30, six
hours), stopping on the main road a short walk from the main plaza.
Connections to Concepción pass through every three hours or so from noon
to midnight, along the way look out for the Piedras de Paquio rock
formation on your right side at Km 322. Buses for San Ignacio de Velasco
pass through around 4pm and 9:30pm, but the road is in a terrible state and
it’s a tiresome journey. For the return to Santa Cruz you can avoid the often
overcrowded buses by taking a taxi (B$50, 4½ hours); these leave when
full. Listen for them honking for passengers along the main road.
CONCEPCIÓN
 3 / POP 14,500
Sleepy ‘Conce’ is a dusty village with a friendly, quiet atmosphere in the
midst of an agricultural and cattle-ranching area. It stands 182km west of
San Ignacio de Velasco and is the center for all the mission restoration
projects. The town is the most visited of the missions, partly because of its
accessibility (the asphalt road ends here), but also because its pictureperfect church is one of the most elaborate on the circuit.
 Sights
Buying a museum pass (B$25) from any of the town’s main sights gets you
entry to all the others.
Catedral de Concepción
( 8am-noon & 2-6pm Mon-Sat, 10am-noon Sun) Built in 1709, this
elaborately restored cathedral on the east of the plaza has an overhanging
roof supported by 121 huge tree-trunk columns and a similar bell tower. It
is decorated with golden baroque designs depicting flowers, angels and the
MUSEUM
MUSEUM
BOUTIQUE HOTEL
HOTEL
HOTEL
Holy Virgin. The decor gives some idea of the former opulence of the
village.
Restoration Workshops
( 7:30am-noon & 1:30am-5:45pm Mon-Fri) Architectural aficionados
should visit the restoration workshops behind the mission, where many of
the fine replicas and restored artworks are crafted.
Museo Misional
(admission B$8; 8am-noon & 2-6pm Tue-Sat, 10am-noon Sun) Intricate
art restoration work is performed in the Museo Misional on the south side
of the plaza which, apart from being the birthplace of the former Bolivian
president Hugo Suárez, also has scale models of all the churches on the
mission circuit.
 Sleeping & Eating
There are plenty of places to stay in Conce, but you’ll start to notice a
recurring theme of flowery courtyards, Chiquitano wall paintings and very
similar prices.
Gran Hotel Concepción $$$
( 964-3031; s/d/tr B$225/405/450; ) The most upscale place to lay
your head is this charming, unapologetically Jesuit-styled hotel with a pool,
a quiet patio with a lush, pretty garden, and intricately carved wooden
pillars. The laundry comes in handy if you are finishing the dusty mission
circuit. It’s on the west side of the plaza.
Hotel Oasis Chiquitano $$
( 964-3223; s/d B$90/180, with air-con B$130/260; ) Well
maintained with simple rooms and an orchid garden, it’s one block north of
the plaza. The price includes access to the Oasis Chiquitano pool complex
(admission for nonguests B$15) next door.
La Casona $
BUFFET
ICE CREAM
( 964-3064; s/d B$70/140; ) Though not exactly going out on a limb in
terms of decor and layout (courtyard, wall paintings, you know the type!),
the price here is slightly lower for very much the same level of quality,
making it a wise choice for the thrifty, despite the lack of a pool.
El Buen Gusto $
(north side of plaza; almuerzo B$28) Good-value almuerzos, with salad bar,
are served here – enjoy the leafy, quiet patio on the north side of the plaza.
Locals insist it’s the best place to eat in town.
Alpina $
(ice cream B$5) Top place to cool off with a helado. It’s on the south side of
the plaza.
 Information
There is a very well-stocked Infotur office ( 8am-noon & 2-6pm MonSat) a block north of the plaza with information on the entire mission
circuit.
 Getting There & Away
Micros (B$35, seven hours) from Santa Cruz to Concepción run every two
or three hours from 7:30am till 8:30pm via San Javier and drop off on the
main road, a 15-minute walk from the plaza or a B$3 moto-taxi ride away,
or at the respective company offices. Trufis (B$60, five hours) to Santa
Cruz leave when full from near the market. If you are thinking of visiting
Concepción and continuing on to San Ignacio de Velasco on the same day,
you need to leave Santa Cruz very early. The San Ignacio buses from Santa
Cruz (B$60, 11 hours) pass through Concepción around 5:30pm and 11pm,
stopping on the main road 1km from the plaza.
SAN IGNACIO DE VELASCO
 3 / POP 41,400
The first mission church at San Ignacio de Velasco, founded in 1748, was
once the largest and most elaborate of all the mission churches. It was
demolished in the 1950s and replaced by a modern abomination. Realizing
BOUTIQUE HOTEL
HOTEL
they’d made a hash of it, the architects razed the replacement and designed
a reasonable facsimile of the original structure. The new version retains a
beautiful altar and wooden pillars from the original church and overlooks an
extensive and well-pruned plaza. Several attractive, large wooden crosses (a
trademark of Jesuit mission towns and villages) stand at intersections just
off the plaza.
Only 700m north of the church is the imposing Laguna Guapomó,
where you can swim or rent a boat and putter around.
 Festivals & Events
There’s a big party celebrating the election of Miss Litoral during the last
weekend in March. San Ignacio fetes its patron saint every July 31. Every
summer, the Chiquitania hosts the International Festival of Baroque
Music, which runs for several weeks and centers on San Ignacio de
Velasco.
 Sleeping
San Ignacio de Velasco is the commercial heart of the mission district, so
there’s a good choice of accommodations.
Hotel La Misión $$$
( 962-2333; www.hotel-lamision.com; s/d B$400/ 470; ) For a bit of
luxury, neocolonial style, try this place on the east side of the plaza. It has
chic rooms, a little pool and opulent suites and there’s also a good upmarket
restaurant serving an eclectic choice of dishes. Check out the wooden
pillars in front, one is beautifully carved with the image of a group of
Bolivian musicians.
Hotel Palace $
( 962-2063; s/d B$80/160) ‘Palace’ is overdoing it a bit, but for budget
travelers this simple hotel, in the shadow of the church on the west side of
the plaza, couldn’t be better placed. Rooms lack much in the way of
imagination but this is still a cheap central option.
PENSION
INTERNATIONAL
BOLIVIAN
Casa Suiza $
( 7630-6798; Sucre; s/d B$35/70) The helpful proprietor here speaks
German and Spanish, has a wonderful library and can organize horseback
riding, fishing trips and visits to surrounding haciendas. Paying B$20 extra
gets you a fantastic homemade breakfast.
 Eating
Unfortunately, eating options are pretty poor here and on Sunday everything
is closed; eat at your hotel if you can. If you are on a budget try the
following, all on the plaza.
Club Social $$
(mains B$30-50) Arguably the best in town, at least at weekends, when it
serves up juicy churrasco (steak) for all and sundry. Á la carte menu during
the week. It’s on the west side of the plaza.
Bar-Restaurant Renacer Princezinha $$
(mains B$25-50) Fortunately, the name of this place isn’t the only mouthful
on offer here. Basic, filling fare will help you fuel your mission tour. On the
south side of the plaza.
 Information
The Casa de la Cultura on the southwest corner of the plaza houses a small
tourist office ( 8am-noon & 2:30-6:30pm Mon-Fri). There is now an
ATM in town.
 Getting There & Away
Micros leave from their respective offices scattered inconveniently around
the market district, a B$5 moto-taxi ride from the center. Cover your
luggage to prevent it from arriving with a thick coating of red dust. An
11am service with 131 del Este runs to Santa Cruz (B$70, 11 hours) via San
Javier and Concepción, and there is sometimes a second departure in the
evening.
PENSION
Several companies run an overly complicated timetable to San José via
either San Miguel or Santa Ana (sometimes depending on the day of
departure). Departure times change constantly and it is worth inquiring
locally about your onward trip on arrival. It can be extremely frustrating if
you intend to stop off briefly at San Miguel or Santa Ana en route –
necessitating an overnight stay. Consider haggling with a taxi driver to visit
these towns. A full-day round-trip should cost around B$300 if the roads
are in good condition.
SAN MIGUEL DE VELASCO
 3 / POP 10,300
Sleepy San Miguel hides in the scrub, 37km from San Ignacio. Its church
was founded in 1721 and is, according to the late Hans Roth, the most
accurately restored of all the Bolivian Jesuit missions. Its spiral pillars,
carved wooden altar with a flying San Miguel, extravagant golden pulpit,
religious artwork, toylike bell tower and elaborately painted facade are
simply superb.
Although not designed by Martin Schmidt, the church does reflect his
influence and is generally considered the most beautiful of Bolivia’s Jesuit
missions. A unique feature of San Miguel is the presence of no fewer than
seven bells in the bell tower. When rung in combination they transmit a
complicated code language to the populace. The largest bell rung in tandem
with two others signals the departure of a dignitary, rung alone it’s the
baptism of a child, while a special bell calls the faithful to prayer. You
might want to pray that you never hear the smallest bell in tandem with a
medium-sized bell; it means a child has died.
 Sleeping & Eating
If you’d like to camp, speak with the nuns at the church, who can direct you
to a suitable site.
Alojamiento Pardo $
( 962-4209; Sucre; s/d B$70/120, without bathroom B$40/80) Just off the
plaza, this is a simple and spartan option.
 Information
There is a tourist office ( 962-4222; Calle 29 de Septiembre) for
information.
 Getting There & Away
A complicated system of micros runs the circuit between San Miguel, San
Ignacio de Velasco and San Rafael de Velasco, with departures sometimes
running clockwise and sometimes counterclockwise (according to the day,
rain, driver’s fancy etc). Typically they leave in the morning with an
occasional additional mid-afternoon service, but timetables change
constantly and locals recommend that you inquire about your onward travel
on arrival. If necessary get a taxi to San Ignacio, but if the roads are bad
expect to pay more.
SANTA ANA DE VELASCO
The mission at this tiny Chiquitano village, 24km north of San Rafael de
Velasco, was established in 1755. The church, with its earthen floor and
palm-frond roof, is more rustic than the others and recalls the first churches
constructed by the Jesuit missionaries upon their arrival. In fact the building
itself is post-Jesuit, but the interior contains exquisite religious carvings and
paintings.
Given its age, the original structure was in remarkable condition and the
church has been recently restored. During renovations a diatonic harp, more
than 1.5m tall, was found; it’s displayed in the church and is a lovely
complement to the local children’s music practice.
VISIT THE BAT CAVE
Bats may not be everybody’s cup of tea, but if you have made the long slog to San Matías then
you may want to take the time to pop in on the nearby bat cave, home of the golden spear-nosed
bat Lonchorrhina aurita. Characterized by its golden fur and ridiculously long ears and noseleaf, it is a charismatic creature that has only recently been rediscovered in Bolivia, having been
last recorded in the 1930s.
A campaign by the Programa para la Conservacion de Murcielagos de Bolivia (PCMB;
http://murcielagosdebolivia.com) has raised awareness of the importance of this cave for the
conservation of the species, even making it the central character in a children’s book that teaches
the ecological benefits of its conservation. A community-led ecotourism project has been
proposed to protect the habitat of the bat, though you can’t enter the cave itself. The PCMB
website has a wealth of bat-related information.
SAN RAFAEL DE VELASCO
 3 / POP 5000
San Rafael de Velasco, 132km north of San José de Chiquitos, was founded
in 1696. Its church was constructed between 1743 and 1747, the first of the
mission churches to be completed in Bolivia. In the 1970s and 1980s the
building was restored, along with the churches in Concepción and San José
de Chiquitos.
The interior is particularly beautiful, and the original paintings and
woodwork remain intact. The pulpit is covered with a layer of lustrous
mica, the ceiling is made of reeds and the spiral pillars were carved from
cuchi (ironwood) logs. It’s the only mission church to retain the original
style, with cane sheathing. Most interesting are the lovely music-theme
paintings in praise of God along the entrance wall, which include depictions
of a harp, flute, bassoon, horn and maracas.
On the main road Alojamiento Paradita ( 962-4008; s/d B$50/100,
without bathroom B$30/60) is good enough for a brief stay and has a basic
comedor (dining hall).
The best place to wait for rides south to San José de Chiquitos (five to six
hours) or north to Santa Ana, San Miguel or San Ignacio is on the main
road. In the morning, buses run in both directions. Ask at the small tourist
office ( 962-4022) in the municipal building for the latest timetables.
SANTIAGO DE CHIQUITOS
Set in the hills, the Jesuit mission at Santiago de Chiquitos, 20km from the militarized access
town Roboré (on the railway line), provides a welcome break from the tropical heat of the
lowlands. Its church is well worth a look, and there are some great excursions from Santiago, such
as the restaurant El Mirador, a 15-minute walk from the village, with dizzy views of the Tucavaca
valley. The round-trip taxi fare from Roboré is B$120 for up to four people.
CHURCH
WALKING
SAN JOSÉ DE CHIQUITOS
 3 / POP 16,600
An atmospheric place, San José de Chiquitos has the appeal of an old
Western film set. The frontier town, complete with dusty streets straight out
of High Noon and footpaths shaded by pillar-supported roofs, is flanked on
the south by a low escarpment and on the north by flat, soggy forest. With
an enormous and handsome plaza shaded by toboroche (thorny bottle) trees,
the most accessible Jesuit mission town is also arguably the nicest.
 Sights & Activities
Jesuit Mission Church
( 8am-noon & 2-6pm Mon-Sat, 10am-noon Sun) San José has the only
stone Jesuit mission church and merits a visit even if you miss all the
others. Although the main altar is nearly identical to those in other nearby
missions and has vague similarities to churches in Poland and Belgium, the
reason behind its unusual exterior design remains unclear.
The church compound consists of four principal buildings arranged
around the courtyard and occupying an entire city block. Construction
began prior to 1731 with the bell tower finished in 1748, the funerario
(death chapel) dated 1752 and the parroquio (living area) completed in
1754. It is believed, however, that only the facades were finished before the
Jesuits were expelled in 1767. All construction work was done by the
Chiquitano people under Jesuit direction.
Santa Cruz la Vieja Walk
Just south of town, an archway supported by bañistas (bathers) indicates
your entry into the Zona Balnéaria where there are a number of open-air
swimming options.
A few kilometers further along is the Parque Histórico Santa Cruz la
Vieja (admission B$10), site of the original city of Santa Cruz de la Sierra.
The only thing left behind of the old city is an abandoned guardhouse. Just
beyond here is a statue of town founder Ñuflo de Chávez next to a
HOTEL
HOTEL
HOTEL
INTERNATIONAL
ITALIAN
reconstructed choza – a typical Chiquitano dwelling with the characteristic
low doorway used for defensive purposes.
Uphill from here there is a trek to the Cataratas del Suton waterfall and
a stunning viewpoint, though it is easy to get lost and a guide is
recommended. Ask at the tourist office.
 Sleeping
Hotel Villa Chiquitana $$
( 7315-5803; s/d/tr B$350/400/450; ) Set on the east side of the plaza
this is the most attractive place to stay in town and is on a par with the best
hotels on the circuit. OK, so the decor with its regional wall paintings is
probably something you’ve seen before, but it’s still nice, isn’t it?
Hotel Turubó $
( 972-2037; s B$80-120, d B$100-150; ) A good, solid, budget choice,
in which the more expensive rooms have air-con. On the west side of the
plaza.
Hotel El Patriarca $
( 972-2089; s B$60-70, d B$100; ) A standard but clean budget hotel
situated on the main plaza that represents good value for money.
 Eating
El Cubanito $$
(mains B$30-55) A mishmash of decorative styles gives this restaurant a
somewhat unfinished look, but smiling straw-hatted waiters serving pastas
and meats more than make up for it. It’s located on the main plaza.
Sabor y Arte $$
(mains B$29-60) There’s a distinctly French ambience here, though the
menu is Italian with mainly pizza and pasta. The paintings and artesanías
that adorn the place are all for sale. Owner Pierre is a mine of local tourist
information. Just off the main plaza.
 Information
There is no ATM in town but local banks will give cash advances on Visa
and MasterCard. A useful Infotur office ( 972-2084) in the Alcaldía on
the corner of the plaza has information about all the missions.
 Getting There & Away
The route between San Ignacio and San José (via San Rafael de Velasco and
San Miguel de Velasco) suffers from a confused, irregular and frequently
changing timetable. At the time of writing there was a single 7am or 2pm
departure on alternate days between the two towns, but we recommend that
you check locally for the latest departure times. Buses from Santa Cruz
depart daily from the bimodal terminal between 4pm and 6pm (B$50, five
hours), though the road is in a terrible state.
Easily the easiest and most comfortable way to travel between San José
and Santa Cruz or Quijarro is by train. You’ll need to show your passport on
purchasing your ticket and again to access the platform.
FAR EASTERN BOLIVIA
East of San José de Chiquitos the railway line passes through a bizarre and
beautiful wilderness region of hills and monoliths. Further east, along the
Brazilian border, much of the landscape lies soaking beneath the wildliferich swamplands of the Pantanal.
CHOCHIS
Tiny Chochis, 360km east of Santa Cruz on the railway line, sits at the base of the imposing red
rock Cerro de Chochis. The main reason for visiting is to see the remarkable Santuario
Chochis, a religious sanctuary and memorial built to commemorate the victims of a flood.
Though relatively modern (the disaster occurred in 1979), the wood carvings that adorn the
sanctuary are the rival of anything seen in the Jesuit missions and the site has a palpable sense of
mourning that allows you to share in the grief of the townsfolk.
Today the town is trying to organize itself toward a sustainable community-led tourism
project and there is a basic eco-albergue (per person B$50) built from local materials where
you can spend the night. The surrounding countryside here is great for walking, and local guides
can take you to waterfalls, stunning viewpoints and hidden natural pools. Contact Probioma (
in Santa Cruz 343-1322; www.probioma.org.bo) for details on how to visit.
Quijarro
 3 / POP 12,900
The eastern terminus of the railway line has its home in Quijarro, a muddy
collection of shacks and the border-crossing point between Bolivia and the
city of Corumbá, Brazil. On a hill in the distance you will glimpse a
wonderful preview of Corumbá, the gateway to the Brazilian Pantanal, a
Unesco-recognized eco-region.
Tours
ECOTOUR
HOSTEL
Pantanal
Hotels in Quijarro can organize boat tours to the Pantanal but almost
invariably they visit the Brazilian side and frequently go to the same areas
as cheaper trips in Brazil do. A comfortable three-day excursion, including
transportation, food and accommodations (on the boat), should cost around
B$1200 per person.
Sleeping & Eating
There are alojamientos (basic accommodations) on the left as you exit from
the railway station. The Lonely Planet–reviewed options are better.
Tamengo $$
( 978-3356; www.tamengo.com; Costa Rica 57; dm B$60-100, r B$360, r
without bathroom B$240; ) A cracking HI hostel that is something of a
mini-resort as there are a variety of minimalist rooms to suit a varied
clientele. Though the bar may be a popular hangout for young backpackers,
you are just as likely to run into families and even businessmen in this
something-for-everyone option.
CROSSING THE BORDER TO BRAZIL
The main border crossing to Brazil is at Quijarro at the end of the train line, with a second,
minor crossing at San Matías, the access point to the northern Brazilian Pantanal.
You’ll more than likely arrive in Quijarro by train between 7am and 9am to be greeted by a
line of taxi drivers offering to take you the 3km to the border (B$10). Customs offices (
8am-11am & 2-5pm Mon-Fri, 9am-1pm Sat & Sun) are on opposing sides of the bridge.
Bolivian officials have been known to unofficially charge for the exit stamp, but stand your
ground politely. Crossing this border you are generally asked to show a yellow-fever vaccination
certificate. No exceptions are granted and you will be whisked off to a vaccination clinic if you
fail to produce it. On the Brazilian side of the border yellow canarinhos (city buses) will take
you into Corumbá (R$2.50). Brazilian entry stamps are given at the border. Get your stamp as
soon as possible to avoid later problems and make sure you have the necessary visas if you
require them.
For a slightly more adventurous border crossing try San Matías. In the dry season, a TransBolivia bus leaves at 7:45pm from Santa Cruz to Cáceres in Brazil (30 hours), via San Matías
(B$150, 26 hours). Brazilian entry or exit stamps should be picked up from the Polícia Federal
RESORT
office at Rua Antônio João 160 in Cáceres; get your exit and entry stamps for Bolivia in Santa
Cruz.
El Pantanal Hotel-Resort $$$
( 978-2020; www.elpantanalhotel.com; s B$348-728, d B$446-992; )
This five-star place is in the beautiful Arroyo Concepción, 12km from
Puerto Suárez and 7km from Corumbá. It offers wide-ranging luxury, 600
hectares of grounds and several restaurants, as well as a number of touristic
packages exploring the Pantanal.
Getting There & Away
Train services cross the Chiquitania en route from Quijarro to Santa Cruz,
arriving at the border town between 6am and 8am each day. The ticket
office opens around 7am and tickets sell out fast, so don’t hang around. The
bus station is two blocks from the train station. Services to Santa Cruz
(B$70, 12 hours) via San José (B$60; seven hours) leave at 4pm.
Top of section
     Includes »
     Villa Tunari
     Parque Nacional Carrasco
     Rurrenabaque
     Parque Nacional Madidi
     Reserva Biosférica del Beni
     San Ignacio de Moxos
     Trinidad
     Los Lagos
     Guayaramerín
     Riberalta
     Cobija
Amazon Basin
Why Go?
The Amazon Basin is one of Bolivia’s largest and most mesmerizing
regions. The rainforest is raucous with wildlife and spending a few days
roaming the sweaty jungle is an experience you’re unlikely to forget. But it’s
not only the forests that are enchanting: it’s also the richness of the
indigenous cultures, traditions and languages that exist throughout the
region.
Mossy hills peak around the town of Rurrenabaque, most people’s first
point of entry into the region and the main base camp for visits to the
fascinating Parque Nacional Madidi. This is home to a growing ethnoecotourism industry that looks to help local communities. The village of San
Ignacio de Moxos is famous for its wild July fiesta and Trinidad, the region’s
biggest settlement and an active cattle ranching center, is the transit point
toward Santa Cruz. North of here the frontier towns of Riberalta and Cobija
are in remote regions that few travelers dare to tread.
When to Go
May-Oct Make travel a whole lot easier by avoiding the rain.
Mid-Jun Bull running and mayhem at the Fiesta de la Santísima Trinidad.
Jul The village goes wild during the San Ignacio de Moxos fiesta.
Best Places to Eat
»Churrasqueria La Estancia ( Click here )
»Los Farroles ( Click here )
»Tropical ( Click here )
»Jungle Bar Moskkito ( Click here )
»La Perla de Rurre ( Click here )
Best Places to Stay
»Sadiri ( Click here )
»Chalalan ( Click here )
»Los Lagos ( Click here )
»Hotel de Selva El Puente ( Click here )
»Hostal Sirari ( Click here )
Amazon Basin Highlights
 Glide down the long Río Mamoré ( Click here ) on a boat trip
between Trinidad and Guayaramerín
 Probe the pampas on a tour from Rurrenabaque ( Click here )
 Party with the locals at the Amazon’s best village fiesta in San
Ignacio de Moxos ( Click here )
 Hike to the Cavernas del Repochón in Parque Nacional
Carrasco ( Click here )
 Boat off into the rainforest to the sustainable community-run
Chalalán ( Click here ) project in Parque Nacional Madidi
 Taste the high life in the luxurious mountain forest at Sadiri (
Click here )
 Hook yourself a monster while fishing at Los Lagos ( Click here
)
History
The Bolivian Amazon has always oozed mystery. The Incas believed that a
powerful civilization lived in the great rainforest, and tried to conquer the
area in the 15th century. Legend has it that the indigenous peoples of the
western Bolivian Amazon, mainly the Moxos tribe, are said to have offered
such a mighty resistance to the invading army that, once they realized they
were unable to beat them, the Incas sought an alliance and settled among the
Moxos.
The tale of the Incas’ experience fired the imagination of the Spanish
conquerors a century later – they were chasing their own legend in search of
a rich and powerful civilization in the depths of the Amazonian forest. The
name of the kingdom was El Dorado (the Golden One) which they thought
lay somewhere east of the Andean Cordillera, near the source of the Río
Paraguay. The Spanish spent the entire 16th century trying to find the elusive
kingdom, but, unfamiliar with the rainforest environment, found nothing but
death and disease. By the 17th century they moved their search elsewhere.
Though the Spanish were disappointed with their search in the Moxos
region, the Jesuits saw their opportunity to ‘spread the word’ to the highly
spiritual moxeños. The hardy missionaries were the first Europeans to
significantly venture into the lowlands. They founded their first mission at
Loreto in 1675. While they imposed Christianity and European ways, the
Jesuits also recognized the indigenous peoples’ expertise in woodwork,
which eventually produced the brilliant carvings now characteristic of the
missions. They imported herds of cattle and horses to some of their remote
outposts, and ranching remains today the region’s main source of income.
The region is now under increasing pressure from the expansion of the
agricultural frontier, as vast tracts of forest are converted into ranch land.
Following the expulsion of the Jesuits in 1767, the Franciscan and
Dominican missionaries, as well as the opportunistic settlers who followed,
brought mainly slavery and disease. Otherwise, the vast, steamy forests and
plains of northern Bolivia saw little activity for decades.
More recently finding a way to sustainably exploit the natural resources of
the region has become an increasingly hot potato. A proposed road building
project that would link Villa Tunari with San Ignacio de Moxos was
canceled following demonstrations by indigenous groups and
environmentalists who complained that the route would bisect the Tipnis
Reserve. This inspired a counter march in 2012 by indigenous groups from
the Moxos and Tunari areas who insisted that the road was vital for the
economic development of their isolated homeland.
National Parks & Reserves
The Bolivian Amazon is part of the most biodiverse biome on earth, and the
country’s best-known national parks and reserves are located here. For birdwatchers, monkey lovers and jaguar seekers, this region is paradise. You can
choose between the jungles and wild rivers of lush Parque Nacional Madidi,
the less-frequented cerrados (savannas) of Reserva Biosférica del Beni, the
Barba Azul Reserve, home to one of the world’s rarest parrots, and the
virtually unexplored ‘lost world’ of Parque Nacional Noel Kempff Mercado.
Conservation International (www.conservation.org) is attempting to raise
awareness of the need for protection of the headwaters of several major
Amazon tributaries with its ambitious Vilcabamba- Amboró Conservation
Corridor initiative, which aims to link Madidi with Manu National Park in
Peru.
 Getting There & Around
Rurrenabaque in the west and Trinidad in the east are the main access towns
to the region. Though it’s easy enough to get to Trinidad from Santa Cruz,
delving deeper into the region either involves flying (if you are smart) or
uncomfortably long bus rides on unpaved roads (get ready to push if it
rains!). If there is even a hint of a shower you’ll need a 4WD to get where
you are going or, if you are lucky, bank on your bus taking at least twice as
long as the ticket salesman tells you. Particularly tedious is the route from La
Paz to Rurrenabaque. Many people decide to wing it (or take a faster 4WD)
after surviving the initial bus ride.
The main airlines all fly to the region, with Aerocon and Amaszonas
specializing in the more remote destinations. Though handy, flights are
frequently canceled during inclement weather. When flying from La Paz to
Rurrenabaque the low-flying planes afford great glimpses of Lake Titicaca
after takeoff, before squeezing past Chacaltaya and soaring over the Yungas.
Watch the landscape change from desolate, rugged highlands to lush,
forested lowlands.
Boat travel is big here, especially in the rainy season, when it is usually
the only viable option. Riverboat travel isn’t for everyone: it’s relaxing but
slowgoing, and there are no real schedules. While the scenery can be
mesmerizing, it changes little, so you’ll want to bring a couple of books
along. Passenger comfort is the last thing cargo-boat builders have in mind,
but Bolivian accommodations standards are still superior to those on the
Brazilian ‘cattle boats’ that ply the Amazon proper.
CHAPARE REGION
The Chapare stretches out beyond the last peaks of the Andes into the
dramatically different landscape of the upper Amazon Basin, where lush,
moist rainforest replaces the dry, barren mountains. The contrast is
breathtaking on the spectacular road between Cochabamba and Villa
Tunari, where twists around the high peaks and mountain lakes drop steeply
into deep, steaming tropical valleys.
The Chapare region is heavily populated with highland campesinos
(subsistence farmers) who emigrated here in the 1970s and started growing
the controversial coca leaf, turning the region into Bolivia’s main source of
coca grown for the manufacture of cocaine (as opposed to Yungas coca,
which makes up the bulk of what Bolivians themselves chew, make into tea
etc). Subsequent attempts by the US Drug Enforcement Agency (DEA) to
eradicate coca have made the region unstable, with frequent messy
confrontations between cocaleros (coca growers), the DEA and the
Bolivian government. A former coca farmer himself, President Evo Morales
has worked hard to protect the rights of those involved in the legal
production of the plant while simultaneously targeting cocaine production
and smuggling.
Villa Tunari
 4 / POP 52,900 / ELEV 300M (984FT)
Strung out along the Cochabamba–Santa Cruz highway, Villa Tunari is a
pleasant spot to relax, hike and swim in cool rivers, and is a relatively tame
introduction to the wilder Amazon. Whether you are coming from the
frozen highlands, or heading toward them, the hot, steamy, jungle air will
make you grateful for the proximity of ‘Las Pozas,’ a series of natural
swimming holes. As visitor numbers increase, the town is developing into
something of a tourist trap and your bolivianos won’t go as far here as they
do further north in the Amazon. That said, the town is a great base for
probing into the wonderful Parque Nacional Carrasco.
ZOO
GARDENS
SWIMMING
Sights & Activities
A good, independent hike will take you to the friendly village of Majo
Pampa. Follow the route toward Hotel de Selva El Puente and turn right
onto the walking track about 150m before the hotel. After crossing the
Arroyo Valería, it’s 8km to the village.
Parque Machía
(Inti Wara Yassi; 413-6572; www.intiwarayassi.org; admission B$6,
photo or video permit B$10; closed Mon) This 36-hectare wildlife refuge
houses more than 200 free-range, poached or injured animals, and other
abused critters. An international crew of volunteers tends to the animals’
every need, but no attempts are made to reintroduce them into the wild (that
means the animals, not the volunteers!).
Tours for wannabe volunteers are conducted daily at 10am. Volunteers
must stay for a minimum of 15 days and can choose between rustic
camping and the hostel, both of which cost B$1450 for the first two weeks,
including food.
Orquidario Villa Tunari
( closed Mon) Lovingly tended by a group of German botanists, Villa
Tunari’s beautiful orchid nursery is home to more than 70 species of
tropical orchids. There’s also a small museum that is worth visiting, El
Bosque restaurant and a couple of cabañas (cabins) available for rent. It’s
just north of the highway, 2km west of town near the tranca (police post).
Pozas
Pozas (swimming holes) are the main source of fun in Villa Tunari. In
addition to Hotel de Selva El Puente’s Las Pozas, there are several free
pozas in town along the Río San Mateo. Great opportunities for fishing,
kayaking and white-water rafting abound in the surrounding rivers, but
ask around to see what’s safe before heading out into the forest on your
own.
Tours
TOUR Fremen Tours
Offline map Google map
Villa Tunari is the focus for Cochabamba-based Fremen Tours ( Click here
), which organizes all-inclusive tours, accommodations, river trips and other
activities at out-of-the-way sites. It also offers live-aboard riverboat cruises
around Trinidad and adventure tours in Parque Nacional Isiboro-Sécure.
SACRED COCA?
Erythroxylum coca is the scientific name for coca, a plant of the family Erythroxylaceae, native
to northwestern South America. A small tree growing to a height of 7ft to 10ft, the species is
identified by its long, opaque leaves and clusters of yellowish-white flowers, which mature into
red berries. In Bolivia the plant grows primarily in the Yungas, north of La Paz, and in the
Chapare region.
But, unless you are a botanist, or have a strange taste in garden plants, you are likely to have
heard of coca for other reasons – prince among them being its role in the production of the
narcotic cocaine. To make the drug, leaves are dried, soaked in kerosene and mashed into a
paste. Then they are treated with hydrochloric and sulfuric acids to form a foul-smelling brown
base. Further treatment with petrol and other chemicals creates cocaine.
The leaf was first imported into Europe in the 16th century and by the end of the 19th century
German scientists were investigating the potential medicinal applications of its analgesic and
anaesthetic properties. It wasn’t long before those same properties made it a popular vice
though, with Sherlock Holmes even enjoying its recreational qualities. Recreational use was
responsible for a five-fold increase in users between 1890 and 1903, and with the drug being
linked to a supposed increase in criminality over the same period its widespread prohibition
followed shortly afterwards
For most Bolivians, however, the white powder snorted by party-goers worldwide has nothing
to do with their sacred plant, and they resent the suggestion that they should be held responsible
for anyone else’s misuse of it. President Evo Morales, a former cocalero (coca grower) himself,
has vowed to continue the war against drug-trafficking, but not at the expense of the country’s
coca industry – according to his government, the two are very different animals. During an
address to the UN in 2006, Morales held up a coca leaf to demonstrate that the leaf and cocaine
are not the same.
So what else is coca used for?
Coca has formed a part of the religious rituals of the inhabitants of the Altiplano since the
pre-Inca period as an offering to the Gods Apus (Mountains), Inti (Sun) and Pacha- mama
(Mother Earth). It is drunk as a tea (mate de coca) or chewed to combat altitude sickness or
overcome fatigue and hunger. To picchar (to chew coca, from the Aymará) involves masticating
a pile of leaves stored as a bolus in the cheek. The bolus is added to continuously and saliva
RESORT
passed over the mass has a mild stimulant and anaesthetic effect on the user. Furthermore
chewing coca also serves as a powerful symbol of religious and cultural identity.
During the conquest, the Spanish rulers were somewhat perturbed by these religious
connotations. Seeing it as an obstacle to their evangelization of the masses, they were, however,
aware that consumption greatly increased output by the labor force. This double-edged sword
led King Philip II to permit its use as ‘essential to the well-being of the Indians’, but to
discourage any religious association.
Outside Bolivia, most people know that cocaine was the original active ingredient in CocaCola, but few realize that the coca plant is still involved in its manufacture. Medical company
Stepan is one of the very few to have a license permitting possession of the plant and its
derivatives in the US, and it imports 100 tons of dried leaf annually, some of it for the
manufacture of medicines, some of it for the production of the Coca-Cola flavoring agent.
Regardless of its status in Bolivia, coca is illegal in most of the world and travelers should not
attempt to take any coca leaves home. Most countries consider the leaf and the narcotic as one
and the same, and you could be charged with possession of a Class A drug for having even a
single petiole in your pocket.
Festivals & Events
The festival of San Antonio, the town’s patron saint, is celebrated in the
first week of June. And for delicious and unique Amazonian fish dishes, be
in town the first week of August for the Feria Regional del Pescado.
Sleeping
Villa Tunari has a huge selection of largely uninviting budget options, all of
which are much of a muchness and charge around B$30/50 per person for
rooms with shared/private bathrooms. However, note that many do not
provide a fan, and you will need one. Those listed here are the ones that
stand out.
 Hotel de Selva El Puente $$
( 458-0085; Integración; s/d/tr B$150/220/360; ) This gorgeous place
is set in 22 hectares of rainforest 4km outside Villa Tunari, near the Ríos
San Mateo and Espíritu Santo confluence. Handsome stone cabins gravitate
around a courtyard and hammocks are on the top floor. The big attractions
here are ‘Las Pozas,’ 14 idyllic natural swimming holes (B$10 for
CABINS
HOTEL
HOTEL
HOTEL
HOTEL
nonguests) deep in the forest. The hotel is run by Fremen Tours. Moto-taxis
will take you here from the center for B$8.
Los Tucanes $$
( 413-6506; 4-person cabins B$677, s/d B$231/ 354; ) Luxurious
cabañas with good beds, elegant decor and a pool to lounge around. Each
room is individually decorated with its own unique wall painting and it’s a
great spot for total vacation surrender. It’s at the Santa Cruz entrance to
town opposite the turnoff for Hotel El Puente.
Hotel Los Cocos $
( 413-6578; s/d B$100/180, without bathroom B$70/120; ) Villa
Tunari’s top budget option, with well-tended rooms, modern bathrooms and
a glorious pool to cool off in. Owner Ray Charles Paz is helpful, friendly
and fortunately doesn’t own a piano!
Hotel/Restaurant Las Palmas $$
( 7281-5695; south side of main road; s/d/tr B$300/400/480, cabins
B$600; ) This is another tropical hotel with a refreshing swimming
pool and enormous tiled rooms. The cabañas are a better bet for big groups.
The open-air restaurant serves well-prepared locally caught fish, and there
are superb views of the river and surrounding hills.
Hotel San Antonio $
( 7431-0200; Plaza Principal; d B$120, s/d without bathroom B$50/100;
) Despite a location on the main square, this budget place goes for an
Amazonian-lodge feel and nearly achieves it. Rooms are basic but tidy, and
those with shared bathrooms do not have fans. You can, however, cool off
in the pool.
Hotel San Martín $$
( 413-6512; south side of main road; s/d/tr B$130/180/250; ) This
welcoming place has a gorgeous garden with a pool.
HOTEL
INTERNATIONAL
INTERNATIONAL
Don Corsino Gran Hotel $$
( 413-6547; north side of main road; d/tr/q B$170/210/350) Despite
being brand new, the unimaginatively plain rooms here are a little
disappointing and air-conditioning would have been a welcome addition at
this price. There are no single rooms and no breakfast, but the per person
rate for triple and quadruple rooms works out quite favorably if you are in a
group.
Eating
With the influx of tourists over recent years, a few reasonable restaurants
have sprung up around town. A rank of food stalls along the highway sells
inexpensive tropical fare, but check hygiene levels before you buy.
Restaurant San Silvestre $$$
(main road next to Las Palmas; mains B$28-63) If the jars of pickled
snakes (not for consumption!) and animal skins hanging off the walls don’t
deter you, dig in to these huge portions big enough for two. Try the
gargantuan pique macho (beef, sausage and chips dish) to really pig out, but
avoid the wild game! The attached Café Mirador opens in the evening for
drinks and has nice river views.
Mamma Titi $$
(Beni; mains B$20-60) Great value on regional and local dishes, plus a wide
selection of pastas and some vegetarian dishes; it’s a in a wooden cabin, a
block from the bridge over the Río Espírito Santo.
Information
There’s an ATM at Banco Union and several telecom and internet places
along the highway.
Getting There & Away
Buses taking the new road between Cochabamba and Santa Cruz pass
through Villa Tunari, though not all at convenient times. Those leaving in
the morning are the best bet. Taxis and micros (minibuses) from
Cochabamba leave from the corner of Avs Oquendo and República during
the day when full (micro/taxi B$15/40, four/three hours).
Getting a taxi from Santa Cruz is much faster than the bus, but means
several changes – this typically involving hopping out of one taxi and
straight into the next. From the old bus terminal take a taxi to Yapacani
(B$23, two hours), from there go to Bulo-Bulo (B$13, one hour), then on to
Ivirgazama (B$13, one hour), then another to Shinahota (B$10, 45 minutes)
and finally one to Villa Tunari (B$6, 30 minutes). It sounds more
complicated than it really is and is a good way of avoiding waiting around
for a bus, though you can expect more people to be piled into each cab than
actually fit!
Parque Nacional Carrasco
Created in 1988, this 622,600-hectare park has some of Bolivia’s most
easily explored cloud forest. It skirts a large portion of the road between
Cochabamba and Villa Tunari, and also includes a big lowland area of the
Chapare region. The rainforest hides a vast variety of mammal species,
together with a rainbow of birds, crawling reptiles, amphibians, fish and
insects.
Tour programs include the highly recommended hike to the Cavernas
del Repechón (Caves of the Night Birds), where you’ll see the weird,
nocturnal guáchero (oilbird) and six bat species. Access is from the village
of Paractito, 8km west of Villa Tunari. This half-day excursion involves a
short slog through the rainforest and a zippy crossing of the Río San Mateo
in a cable-car contraption.
Another interesting option is the Conservation International–backed
Camino en las Nubes (Walk in the Clouds) project, a three-day trek
through the park’s cloud forests, descending with local guides from 4000m
to 300m along the old Cochabamba–Chapare road.
For more details on these tours contact Fremen Tours ( Click here ).
BOAT TOUR
Puerto Villarroel
 4 / POP 40,800
This muddy, tropical port on the Río Ichilo is a small settlement with tinroofed houses raised off the ground to defend them from the mud and wetseason floods. The population here is composed almost entirely of
indigenous Yuqui and colonizing Quechua groups. The town has tried hard
to promote tourism but hasn’t had much success, as there isn’t much to
actually see – unless you’re excited by a military installation, a petroleum
plant and a loosely defined port area. However, if you fancy gliding down
the river toward Trinidad, then a good place to start would be Puerto
Villarroel, a vital transportation terminal and gateway to the Amazon
lowlands.
Activities
Boat Trips
Two types of boat run between Puerto Villarroel and Trinidad. The small
family-run cargo boats that putter up and down the Ríos Ichilo and Mamoré
normally only travel by day and reach Trinidad in around six days. Larger
commercial crafts travel day and night and do the run in three or four days.
Note that these boats are not specifically for tourists and so you should not
expect any special treatment. Conditions are basic.
In Puerto Villarroel, the Capitanía del Puerto and other related portside
offices can provide sketchy departure information on cargo transporters.
Unless military exercises or labor strikes shut down cargo services, you
shouldn’t have more than a three- or four-day wait. Note that when the river
is low you will have much more difficulty finding a boat.
The average fare to Trinidad on either type of boat is around B$250,
including food, or a bit less without meals. The quality of food varies from
boat to boat, but overall the repetitive shipboard diet consists of fish, dried
meat, masaco (mashed yucca or plantain) and fruit. You should seriously
consider bringing snacks to supplement your diet. Few boats along the
Ichilo have cabins. Most passengers sleep in hammocks slung out in the
main lounge, so a mosquito net is a wise investment.
If you are not up to the odyssey of a multiday river cruise, ask around at
the port for owners of lanchas (small boats). For a negotiable fee they can
organize day-long fishing or camping trips to nearby river beaches, as well
as visits to nearby indigenous settlements. In the spirit of responsible
tourism offer to pay what you consider a fair price; a gift of diesel is always
welcome.
Sleeping & Eating
Accommodations options are extremely basic, with a bunch of run-down
residenciales (simple accommodations) clustered around the central plaza;
they charge around B$20 per person. Those who are using river
transportation may be permitted to sleep on the boat.
Half a dozen restaurant shacks opposite the port captain’s office serve up
greasy fish and chicken dishes.
Getting There & Away
Micros from Cochabamba to Puerto Villarroel, marked ‘Chapare’ (B$25,
seven hours), leave from the corner of Avs 9 de Abril and Oquendo, near
Laguna Alalay. The first one sets off around 6:30am, and subsequent buses
depart sporadically when full.
Alternatively, from the old bus terminal in Santa Cruz take a taxi to
Yapacani (B$23, two hours), then another to Bulo-Bulo (B$13, one hour)
and finally a third to Puerto Villaroel (B$10, one hour).
Note that transportation between Cochabamba and Santa Cruz doesn’t
stop at Puerto Villarroel.
WESTERN BOLIVIAN AMAZON
This is the Amazon as it’s meant to be. Rich with wildlife, flora and
indigenous culture, you may never want to leave. In the midst of the tropical
lushness is the lovely town of Rurrenabaque, a major gringo trail hangout.
Pampas, jungle and ethno-ecotourism options are innumerable here, but vary
significantly in quality and price. Parque Nacional Madidi, one of South
America’s, and the world’s most precious wilderness gems, sits on
Rurrenabaque’s doorstep.
Rurrenabaque
 3 / POP 13,700 / ELEV 229M (751FT)
Relaxing ‘Rurre’ (pronounced ‘zussay’), as the town is endearingly known,
has a fabulous setting. Sliced by the deep Río Beni and surrounded by mossy
green hills, the town’s mesmerizing sunsets turn the sky a burned orange,
and a dense fog sneaks down the river among the lush, moist trees. Once
darkness falls, the surrounding rainforest comes alive, and croaks, barks,
buzzes and roars can be heard from a distance.
Rurre is a major traveler base. Backpackers fill the streets, and restaurants,
cafes and hotels cater mainly to Western tastes. Some travelers spend their
days relaxing in the ubiquitous hammocks, but at some stage the majority go
off on riverboat adventures into the rainforest or pampas.
The area’s original people, the Tacana, were one of the few lowland tribes
that resisted Christianity. They are responsible for the name ‘Beni,’ which
means ‘wind,’ as well as the curious name of ‘Rurrenabaque,’ which is
derived from ‘Arroyo Inambaque,’ the Hispanicized version of the Tacana
name ‘Suse-Inambaque,’ the ‘Ravine of Ducks.’
B3
B4
C4
R
u
r
r
e
n
a
b
a
q
u
e
 Activities, Courses & Tours 1 Bala Tours 2 Fluvial Tours/Amazonia Adventures 3 Hotel El Ambaibo Swimming Pool
A5
B4
C5
B5
D3
A5
F2
C4
B4
C4
B3
C5
B3
C4
B4
B4
B4
B3
C3
B3
A4
D3
B4
C4
B4
B4
B4
 Sleeping 4 Centro de Recreación del Ejército 5 Hostal Pahuichi 6 Hostal Rurrenabaque 7 Hostal Turístico Santa Ana 8 Hotel Los Tucanes de Rurre 9 Hotel Oriental
10 La Perla Andina
 Eating 11 Café Piraña
12 Casa de Campo
13 Cherrie’s Ice Cream Shop
14 La Cabaña
15 La Perla de Rurre
16 Playa Azul
17 Restaurant Tacuaral
 Drinking
18 Bungalow Café Lounge
19 Jungle Bar Moskkito
20 Luna Lounge
 Entertainment
21 Banana Club
 Shopping
22 Clothing stalls
23 Pampas Supermercado
 Information
24 Chalalán Ecolodge Office
25 Immigration
26 Laundry Number One
27 Laundry Service Rurrenabaque
28 San Miguel del Bala Office
29
Tourist Office
 Transport
30 Amaszonas
B4
SWIMMING
SWIMMING
SWIMMING
31 TAM
Sights & Activities
Though there isn’t really that much to do in town, Rurrenabaque’s appeal is
in its surrounding natural beauty. It’s easy to pass a day or three here while
waiting to join a tour. Behind town is a low but steep mirador (lookout) that
affords a view across the seemingly endless Beni lowlands; it’s reached by
climbing up the track at the southern end of Bolívar.
Butterfly Pool El Mirador
Near the mirador it is named after, this is a fabulous spot where you can
swim and swoon over gobsmacking views of the Beni lowlands.
Hotel El Ambaibo Swimming Pool
Offline map Google map
(nonguest B$20) If you prefer a tiled, chlorinated pool, try the Olympicsized piscina at Hotel El Ambaibo on Santa Cruz.
El Chorro
El Chorro, an idyllic waterfall and pool 1km upstream, makes for a pleasant
excursion. On a rock roughly opposite El Chorro is an ancient serpentine
engraving, which was intended as a warning to travelers: whenever the
water reached serpent level, the Beni was considered unnavigable. You can
only reach it by boat so inquire at the harbor and strike a deal.
BIGGEST CANOPY IN BOLIVIA
Community-run projects are well worthy of support as the profits go directly to the people who
deserve them. A series of tranquilo (tranquil) community-run tourism projects operate in Parque
Nacional Madidi but if you need more adrenaline, then try the unambiguously named Biggest
Canopy in Bolivia. It’s a forest canopy zipline in Villa Alcira, outside Rurrenabaque, which is
TOUR
TOUR
HOTEL
CABINS
aimed at those with a head for heights, a strong stomach and a need for speed. Book at the office
in Rurre; the price includes transportation.
Tours
Most agencies have offices on Avaroa.
Bala Tours
Offline map Google map
( 892-2527; www.visit-amazonia.com; Santa Cruz at Comercio) Has its
own jungle camp, Caracoles, a comfortable pampas lodge on Río Yacumo
and a forest lodge Tacuaral.
Fluvial Tours/Amazonia Adventures
Offline map Google map
( 892-2372; Avaroa) This is Rurrenabaque’s longest-running agency.
Sleeping
The sleeping scene in Rurrenabaque is ruled by one thing: the hammock.
The sagging sack can be the sole factor in deciding whether a business does
well here or not, so expect hammocks and enjoy the mandatory laziness.
Hotel Oriental $
Offline map Google map
( 892-2401; Plaza 2 de Febrero; s/d B$100/150) If you meet people who
are staying at the Oriental, right on the plaza, they’ll invariably be raving
about what an excellent place it is – and it really is. Comfy rooms, great
showers, garden hammocks for snoozing and big breakfasts are included in
the price.
La Isla de los Tucanes $$$
( 892-2127; www.islatucanes.com; Bolívar; s/d B$380/480, cabins min 3
people per person from B$240; ) An ecological cabin complex in the north
HOSTEL
HOTEL
HOTEL
PENSION
of town with thatched Amazonian bungalows designed to make you feel
further away from the town center than you really are. With pool tables, an
international restaurant and several swimming pools there is no real reason
to leave – unless of course you are going into the jungle proper.
Hostal Pahuichi $
Offline map Google map
( 892-2558; Comercio; s/d/tr B$100/100/150) It’s amazing what a good
facelift can do to an ageing hotel. The newly renovated suites here are
tasteful, colorful and dare we say it stylish (almost!), with sleek wooden
furniture and sparklingly tiled private bathrooms. Only the reception left to
fix now!
Hotel Safari $$
( 892-2210; Comercio; s/d B$250/330; ) Rurre’s poshest option sits by
the riverfront, away from the town center. It’s a quiet, Korean-run place with
simple but comfortable rooms with fans. Amenities, catering to tour groups,
include a restaurant.
Hotel Los Tucanes de Rurre $
Offline map Google map
( 892-2039; Bolívar at Aniceto Arce; s/d B$80/100, without bathroom
B$70/80) This big, thatched-roof house offers a sprawling garden, a roof
terrace and sweeping views over the river. There are hammocks swinging on
the patio, a pool table, and the clean and simple rooms are painted in gentle
colors. Breakfast is included.
Centro de Recreación del Ejército $
Offline map Google map
( 892-2377; Plaza 2 de Febrero; r per person B$80, without bathroom
B$30) If only all army barracks were like this they might not have so much
trouble getting people to sign up! It’s a strange concept, almost an officers
club, but it’s essentially a good, modern, budget hotel with a river terrace.
Just remember to salute if somebody calls your name and expect disciplined
reception staff!
HOSTEL
PENSION
PENSION
SOUTH AMERICAN
Hostal Rurrenabaque $
Offline map Google map
( 892-2481; Vaca Diez, near Bolívar 1490; s/d B$100/120, s without
bathroom B$70; ) A mustard-colored, porticoed edifice, with muted woodfloored rooms. There are no-frills here except for on the curtains, but the
availability of a flaky wi-fi connection may give it the edge over its
competitors.
Hostal Turístico Santa Ana $
Offline map Google map
( 892-2614; Avaroa; s/d B$80/90, without bathroom B$40/70) Decent
value, though some of the rooms with shared bathrooms are dingy and
claustrophobic. As with most places there is the obligatory hammock garden.
La Perla Andina $
Offline map Google map
( 7283-5792; 18 de Noviembre s/n; r per person B$35) A block from the
bus station, this bottom-end budget option is useful if you’re looking to
catch an early bus. It’s clean and an effort has been made to prettify the
rooms despite the price.
Eating
Rurre’s eating options are varied, from quick chicken and snacks to fresh
river fish and decent international cooking. Several fish restaurants line the
riverfront near the market: candlelit La Cabaña and Playa Azul grill or fry up
the catch of the day for around B$40. In addition to the Beni standard,
masaco (mashed yucca or plantains, served with dried meat, rice, noodles,
thin soup and bananas), try the excellent pescado hecho en taquara (fish
baked in a special local pan) or pescado en dunucuabi (fish wrapped in a
rainforest leaf and baked over a wood fire).
La Perla de Rurre $$
Offline map Google map
HEALTH FOOD
INTERNATIONAL
INTERNATIONAL
ICE CREAM
(Bolívar at Vaca Diez; mains B$40-50) Everyone in Rurre will tell you that
this is their favorite restaurant and ‘The Pearl’ does indeed serve up some
mean fresh fish and chicken dishes. The surroundings are simple but the
service is excellent.
Casa de Campo $$$
Offline map Google map
(Vaca Diez at Avaroa; breakfast B$20-65; 8am-2pm & 6-10pm) Healthy
food is the name of the game here, with all-day breakfasts, homemade
pastries, vegetarian dishes, soups, salads, you name it. The friendly owner is
keen to make her guests happy, but her breakfast is the priciest in town.
Restaurant Tacuaral $$
Offline map Google map
(Santa Cruz at Avaroa; mains B$18-38, sandwiches B$18) This open-air
eatery with shaded sidewalk seating has an ambitious menu, covering
breakfast to dinner. It’s friendly and popular, especially for its lasagna. The
Mexican dishes won’t have you tossing your sombrero into the air, but the
sandwiches are huge.
Café Piraña $$
Offline map Google map
(Santa Cruz nr Avaroa s/n; mains B$15-50) This Piraña has bite, with a great
chill-out area, delicious vegetarian and meat dishes, yummy breakfasts,
lovely fresh juices, a library and film screenings most nights upstairs.
Cherrie’s Ice Cream Shop $
Offline map Google map
(Santa Cruz near Avaroa; ice cream B$6-25) Sometimes you just need one,
don’t you? This little kiosk has a variety of flavors, plus inventive sundaes
and milkshakes to whet your appetite.
CHOOSING A JUNGLE OR PAMPAS TOUR
Jungle and pampas tours are Rurrenabaque’s bread and butter, but quality of service provided by
the numerous tour agencies varies considerably and in the name of competition some operators
are much less responsible than they ought to be. This is largely a result of over-demanding budget
travelers expecting low prices with big results, bartering prices down and compromising their
own safety and levels of service in the process. In the interests of responsible travel, consider the
following carefully before you hand over your cash.
Not all companies provide the same level of service, and cheaper most definitely does not
mean better. Local authorities have set minimum prices at B$900 for a three-day, two-night
excursion; be suspicious of any company that undercuts those rates and do not barter for a lower
price.
Every company uses the word ‘ecofriendly’ as a throwaway sales gimmick. Catch out the
conmen by asking the vendor to explain how their company is ecofriendly.
There are no guarantees of spotting wildlife. Any company that offers them is likely to be
breaking the rules. Guides are forbidden from feeding, handling or disturbing animals. If your
guide offers to capture anacondas, caiman or other animals, object and tell him why.
Use only SERNAP-authorized operators as these are the only ones allowed to legally enter
Parque Nacional Madidi.
Foreigners must be accompanied by a local guide, but not all speak good English. If this is
likely to be a problem ask to meet your guide.
Talk to other travelers about their experiences and boycott companies that break the rules. Be
responsible in your own expectations.
Better still, opt for one of the community-run ecotourism ventures, which, although more
expensive, are definitely more worthwhile and aim to help sustain communities and preserve the
richness of the rainforests for the generations to come.
Jungle Tours
The Bolivian rainforest is full of more interesting and unusual things than you could ever
imagine. Local guides, most of whom have grown up in the area, can explain animals’ habits and
habitats and demonstrate the uses of some of the thousands of plant species, including the forest’s
natural remedies for colds, fever, cuts, insect bites (which come in handy!) and other ailments.
Note that you are likely to see a lot more plants than animals.
Most trips are by canoe upstream along the Río Beni, and some continue up the Río Tuichi,
camping and taking shore and jungle walks along the way, with plenty of swimming
opportunities and hammock time. Accommodations are generally in agencies’ private camps.
Rain, mud and mariguí (sandflies) make the wet season (especially January to March)
unpleasant for jungle tours, but some agencies have camps set up for wildlife watching at this
time.
Pampas Tours
It’s easier to see wildlife in the wetland savannas northeast of town, but the sun is more
oppressive, and the bugs can be worse, especially in the rainy season. Bring binoculars, a good
flashlight, extra batteries and plenty of strong anti-bug juice. Highlights include playful pink river
dolphins, horseback riding and night-time canoe trips to spot caiman.
BAR
BAR
BAR
CLUB
Drinking & Entertainment
Rurre is a lively town and there are several bars and discos. Most bars run
along the same lines, following a very successful bamboo-walled, palm-roof
model with pub meals served during the day and tropical cocktails at night.
Ask about happy hour, they all have one!
Jungle Bar Moskkito
Offline map Google map
(www.moskkito.com; Vaca Diez) Peruvian-run, but English is spoken here.
There’s a positive vibe, cheery service and the foliage that hangs from the
roof makes you feel like you are in the jungle, whether there are ‘moskkitos’
or not. Throw some darts, shoot some pool and choose your own music – the
extensive menu of CDs is played by request.
Luna Lounge
Offline map Google map
(Avaroa, near Santa Cruz) Though it has moved from its original location,
this is one of Rurre’s longest standing bars with a bouncing atmosphere,
good pizza and great cocktails.
Bungalow Café Lounge
Offline map Google map
(Comercio, near Santa Cruz) Another chip off the old stick of bamboo,
though this takes a slightly harder rock angle in its music.
Banana Club
Offline map Google map
(Comercio; admission incl 1 drink B$15) If you want to try salsa dancing or
Bolivian-style grooving, this slightly sleazy club has Cuban doctors shaking
their booties, locals getting drunk and gringos joining in.
Shopping
The cheap clothing stalls along Pando are a good place to pick up hamacas
(hammocks; single/double B$150/250) and finely woven cotton and
synthetic mosquiteros (mosquito nets; from B$80). Pampas Supermercado
Offline map Google map (Pando, cnr Comercio) is convenient for stocking up
on sun block, repellent and other jungle necessities.
Information
Immigration
Immigration Offline map Google map ( 892-2241; Aniceto Arce, btwn Busch
& Bolívar; 8.30am-12.30pm & 2.30-6.30pm Mon-Fri) For visa
extensions.
Internet Access
Getting online is pricey (B$6 per hour) and often frustratingly slow.
Internet (Comercio; 9am-10pm) Conveniently located and open all day.
Laundry
A couple of ‘per kilo’ laundries offer a next day service (B$8 per kilo), a
same day service (B$10 per kilo) and a four-hour service (B$12 per kilo) if
you are in a hurry.
Laundry Service Rurrenabaque Offline map Google map (Vaca Diez; 8am8pm)
Laundry Number One Offline map Google map (Avaroa; 8am-8pm)
Money
There is one ATM here, a block north of the plaza at Banco Union
(Comercio), but it is wise to bring enough cash just in case it is out of order.
For emergencies you can get cash advances at Prodem (Avaroa; 8am6pm Mon-Fri, 8am-2pm Sat), but only on Visa and MasterCard (including
Visa debit cards). It also does Western Union transfers and changes cash.
Tours can usually be paid for with credit cards.
Post
The post office is on Arce.
Telephone
Entel (cnr Comercio & Santa Cruz; 7am-10pm)
Tourist Information
Tourist office Offline map Google map ( 7138-3684; Vaca Diez at Avaroa;
8am-noon & 2.30-6pm Mon-Fri) Happy to answer questions and keen to
advise on responsible tourism, but short on material.
SERNAP Parque Nacional Madidi office ( 892-2246, 892-2540;
Libertad behind the market; 7am-3pm Mon-Sun) Across the river in San
Buenaventura. Access to the park costs B$125 but should be included in tour
quotes.
Getting There & Away
Air
Rurre’s airport is a few kilometers north of town and there is a two-pronged
terminal fee of B$15. Transfer in minibus to and from the airline offices
costs an additional B$6. The brief flight to La Paz is an affordable way of
avoiding the arduous 24-hour bus journey to the capital. Flights sell out fast
but are frequently cancelled during bad weather. You will be refunded only
70% of the ticket value if your flight is cancelled and you’re not prepared to
wait around for the next one. Be sure to reconfirm your ticket the day before
your flight otherwise you may find yourself without a seat. Irritatingly, if
you wish to fly to Riberalta or Guayaramerín, you need to return to La Paz
or Trinidad.
TAM Offline map Google map ( 892-2398; Santa Cruz) flies between La
Paz and Rurre (B$480, one hour) at least once a day, with additional services
during peak periods. Amaszonas Offline map Google map ( 892-2472;
Comercio, near Santa Cruz) has four daily flights to La Paz (B$650) and
theoretically flies daily to Trinidad (B$581).
Boat
Thanks to the Guayaramerín road, there’s little cargo transportation down
the Río Beni to Riberalta these days and there’s no traffic at all during
periods of low water. You’ll need a dose of luck to find something and will
have to negotiate what you consider a fair price for the trip, which may take
as long as 10 days.
Bus & Jeep
The bus terminal is a good 20-minute walk northeast of the center and all
buses and shared taxis depart from here. Prices are standard and do not vary
between companies.
Several daily services make the daunting trip from Rurrenabaque to La
Paz (B$70, 18 to 24 hours), via Yolosita (B$65, 14 to 20 hours), the hop-off
point for Coroico. If you find the narrow, twisting Andean roads and sheer
drops a harrowing experience on a bus, another option is to bus it as far as
Caranavi and take a shared taxi from there, the rest of the trip being the most
scary, or picturesque, depending on your point of view.
The route to Trinidad (B$150, 17 to 30 hours) via San Borja (taxi/bus
B$80/50, nine to 18 hours) and San Ignacio de Moxos (B$100, 12 hours)
remains one of the worst in the country and is typically closed during the
rainy season. Buses now run year-round to Riberalta (B$110, 17 to 40 hours)
and Guayaramerín (B$120, 18 hours to three days), but you need a healthy
dose of stamina, insect repellent and food if you’re going to attempt it in the
wet season.
Getting Around
TAM and Amaszonas micros (B$6, 10 minutes) shuttle between the airport
and airline offices in town. Moto-taxis around town cost B$3 per ride; there
is a convenient parada (taxi stand) at the corner of Comercio and Santa
Cruz. The ferry across to San Buenaventura leaves from the port area every
20 minutes (B$1) or so from 6am to midnight, though services are less
frequent after 6pm.
SAN BUENAVENTURA
Sleepy San Buenaventura sits across the Río Beni, watching all the busy goings-on in Rurre,
content with its own slower pace. If you’re looking for fine Beni leather goods, visit the store of
well-known leather artisan Manuel Pinto on the main street. Avoid purchasing anything made
from wild rainforest species. The Centro Cultural Tacana ( 892-2394; west side of plaza;
admission B$5; Sun-Thu) has a handicrafts store and celebrates the Tacana people’s unique
cosmovision.
Parque Nacional Madidi
The Río Madidi watershed is one of South America’s most intact
ecosystems. Most of it is protected by the 1.8 million-hectare Parque
Nacional Madidi, which takes in a range of habitats, from the steaming
lowland rainforests to 5500m Andean peaks. This little-trodden utopia is
home to an astonishing variety of Amazonian wildlife: 44% of all New
World mammal species, 38% of neotropical amphibian species, almost 1000
species of bird and more threatened species than any park in the world.
The populated portions of the park along the Río Tuichi have been
accorded a special Unesco designation permitting indigenous inhabitants to
utilize traditional forest resources, but the park has also been considered for
oil exploration and as a site for a major hydroelectric scheme in the past. In
addition, illicit logging has affected several areas around the perimeter and
there’s been talk of a new road between Apolo and Ixiamas that would
effectively bisect the park. Though the hydroelectric scheme has been
abandoned, the debate continues over whether road building and oil
exploration will be permitted, and most suspect that if it is, illegal loggers
will be quick to capitalize on the improved access.
It is difficult to visit the park independently, but if you wish to do so the
B$125 admission fee is payable at the SERNAP office in San Buenaventura
– you must be accompanied by an authorized guide. By far the easiest and
most responsible way to arrange access is by visiting one of the community
projects listed following.
LODGE
Sleeping
Providing a model for responsible, sustainable ecotourism in Bolivia, the
community projects in Madidi preach a respect for culture, environment and
wildlife; and benefit local communities rather than private operators. You
can choose from one-day tours to longer stays, incorporating walks in the
rainforest with visits to indigenous communities, where you can peek into
local lifestyles and traditions. Make sure you don’t give sweets or presents to
children, no matter how cute they look, as this builds unrealistic
expectations. Booking offices for most of these community lodges are
located in Rurrenabaque and prices include park access.
 Chalalán Ecolodge $$$
( 892-2419, in La Paz 2-231-1451; www.chalalan.com; 3 nights & 4 days
all inclusive per person US$390) Bolivia’s oldest and most successful
community-based ecotourism project. Set up in the early 1990s by the
inhabitants of remote San José de Uchupiamonas, it has become a lifeline for
villagers, and has so far generated money for a school and a small clinic.
Built entirely from natural rainforest materials by the enthusiastic San José
youth, the lodge’s simple and elegant huts surround the idyllic oxbow lake,
Laguna Chalalán.
Chalalán provides the opportunity to amble through relatively untouched
rainforest and appreciate the diversity of the native wildlife. While the flora
and fauna are lovely, it’s the sounds that provide the magic here: the
incredible dawn bird chorus, the evening frog symphony, the collective
whine of zillions of insects, the roar of bucketing tropical rainstorms and, in
the early morning, the reverberating chorus of every howler monkey within a
100km radius.
Your trip (once you’re in Rurre) starts with a six-hour canoe ride upstream
on the misty Río Beni, and moves onto the smaller tributary, Río Tuichi.
Once you’re at Chalalán, you can go on long daytime treks or on nocturnal
walks. Boat excursions on the lake are a delight and you can see different
types of monkey who come to feed and drink water. Swimming in the lake
among docile caimans is a must, especially at dusk when the light is
heavenly. On nights prior to departures from the lodge, the guides throw
parties, with windpipe playing, coca chewing and general merriment.
LODGE
LODGE
The village of San José is another three hours upstream by boat, and if
you wish to visit it from Chalalán, though you’ll need to arrange it in
advance, it’s especially rewarding during the week-long fiesta for the local
patron saint around May 1.
Rates include transfers to and from the airport (if you’re coming from La
Paz), one night in Rurre, three great meals per day, a well-trained Englishspeaking guide, excursions, canoe trips on the lake, plus local taxes and a
community levy. The booking office ( 892-2419; www.chalalan.com;
Comercio near Campero) is in Rurrenabaque.
 Sadiri $$$
( 6770-9087, in Santa Cruz 3-356-3636; full board including transfer &
return to Rurrenabaque per person per day US$150) The newest kid on the
community project block is wonderful Sadiri, a set of six luxury cabins in
dense foothill rainforest in the Serranía Sadiri. The indigenous San José de
Uchupiamonas community rejected the advances of the courting oil
companies and with the assistance of local conservationists opted instead for
a sustainable tourist project aimed at bringing long-term benefits to the area.
With community members staffing the lodge and the best-trained wildlife
guides in the Rurrenabaque area, this innovative lodge caters as much for
serious bird-watchers and ecotravelers as it does to those who just revel in
the beauty of natural areas.
What sets Sadiri apart from the other Madidi lodges is its highland
location (between 500m and 950m), resulting in a much cooler temperature
than the sweaty lowlands. This means that there is a whole new set of
animals and birds to enjoy, including mixed flocks filled with dozens of
species of glittering tanagers, each one like a feathered jewel. Bird Bolivia (
Click here ) organizes recommended trips.
Traditional home-cooked meals are served on a terrace flanked with
hummingbird feeders and looking out over Madidi with some of the most
awe-inspiring views of the national park that you could ever imagine.
Bookings are by phone only.
San Miguel del Bala $$$
HOSTEL
( 892-2394; www.sanmigueldelbala.com; Comercio near Vaca Diez,
Rurrenabaque; per person per day B$450) A glorious community ecolodge
in its own patch of paradise right on Madidi’s doorstep, 40 minutes upstream
by boat from Rurre. This Tacana community consists of around 230
inhabitants who’ll be happy to show you their traditional agricultural
methods, weaving and wood-carving.
Accommodations are in cabins with mahogany wood floors, separate
bathrooms and beds covered by silky mosquito nets. There are several
guided walks, including a visit to the San Miguel community. What the
guides lack in English, they make up for with their enthusiasm and
knowledge.
The price includes transportation, accommodations, food and guided
tours. If you go for the three-day/two-night arrangement, you can have a
day’s visit into Parque Nacional Madidi. Guests can also chill in hammocks
in the communal hut. The booking office ( 892-2394;
www.sanmigueldelbala.com; Comercio btwn Vaca Diez) is in Rurrenabaque.
San Borja
 3 / POP 34,350
San Borja is pretty much just a bus- and truck-stop destination, though you
can easily find yourself stuck here waiting for transportation to Trinidad or
Rurrenabaque during the rainy season.
Sleeping
San Borja’s hotels specialize in hard mattresses and turquoise walls. Listed
are two that try to break the mold.
Hostal Jatata $
( 895-3212; s/d B$90/150) Two blocks off the plaza, pick of the bunch
Jatata offers good, comfy rooms and a patio with drooping hammocks. There
is a palapa roof and a half-decent restaurant.
Hotel San Borja HOTEL $
(r per person B$50) Higher-end rooms cater to the choosier visitor; cheaper
ones fall into the turquoise trap but provide a crash-pad for the night. Note
that there is a 6am gospel wake-up call courtesy of the nearby Catholic
church.
Getting There & Away
Amaszonas Offline map Google map ( 895-3185; Bolívar 157) supposedly
has daily round-trip flights between La Paz, San Borja and Trinidad but they
only stop here if there is demand.
The San Borja to Trinidad road is notoriously bad and can be closed for
long periods during the wet season. It’s frustrating for anybody wanting to
travel between Rurrenabaque and Trinidad, and even more so when
transportation that sets out from Rurre bound for Trinidad announces, after a
little local consultation at San Borja, that they can go no further. In theory,
more services to Trinidad depart from San Borja than from Rurre, so you
may find yourself here whether you like it or not, either looking for a
connection, or simply stranded and waiting.
In the dry season buses pull out several times daily from the bus terminal
(3km south of the plaza; B$4 by moto-taxi) for the Reserva Biosférica del
Beni (B$20, 1½ hours), San Ignacio de Moxos (B$40, five hours), Trinidad
(B$50, eight to 12 hours) and Santa Cruz (B$100, 20 to 24 hours). During
the wet season the trip to Trinidad is sometimes attempted by privately
owned 4WD vehicles (per person B$100) commissioned by the bus
companies, though whether they depart or not depends on the whim of the
driver. There are frequent micro services to Rurrenabaque (B$50, nine
hours), which depart when full, or in the wet season you’ll need a 4WD taxi
(B$80 per person).
If you’re Trinidad-bound, note that the Río Mamoré balsa (raft) crossings
close at 6pm, and you need five to six hours to reach them from San Borja.
There are no accommodations on either side of the crossing, so give yourself
plenty of time. Watch for pink river dolphins at river crossings.
LAKE
Reserva Biosférica del Beni
Created by Conservation International in 1982 as a loosely protected natural
area, the 334,200-hectare Beni Biosphere Reserve was recognized by
Unesco in 1986 as a ‘Man & the Biosphere Reserve,’ and received official
recognition the following year through a pioneering debt swap agreement
with the Bolivian government.
The adjacent Reserva Forestal Chimane, a 1.15-million-hectare buffer
zone and indigenous reserve, has been set aside for sustainable subsistence
use by the 1200 Chimane people living there. The combined areas are home
to at least 500 bird species as well as more than 100 mammals and myriad
reptiles, amphibians and insects.
The Chimane reserve was threatened in 1990 when the government
decided to open the area to loggers. Seven hundred Chimanes and
representatives of other tribes staged a march from Trinidad to La Paz in
protest at the decision that would amount to the wholesale destruction of
their land. Logging concessions were changed but not altogether revoked,
and the problems continue.
Sights
The reserve headquarters, El Porvenir, is in the cerrado (savanna) and quite
a distance from the rainforest. The station organizes everything in the
reserve: accommodations, food, guides and horseback riding. The best way
to observe wildlife is to hire a guide at the station and go for a hike, though
the heat might be easier to take if you hire a horse.
Laguna Normandia
This savanna lake, an hour’s walk from El Porvenir, is the reserve’s most
popular destination. The sight of the world’s largest population of crawling,
rare black caimans – there are at least 400 of them – is truly astounding. The
reptiles are the descendants of specimens originally destined to become
unwilling members of the fashion industry, by providing shoe and bag
material for a leather company. When the caiman breeder’s business failed,
the animals were left behind, and sadly the majority perished from neglect,
PARK
WALKING TOUR, HORSEBACK RIDING
crowding and hunger. The survivors were rescued by Bolivian authorities
and airlifted to safety.
Fortunately, caimans have little interest in humans, so it’s generally safe to
observe them at close range while rowboating around with a guide. If you
find them too scary to get up close and personal, climb the 11m viewing
tower.
Totaizal & Reserva Forestal Chimane
A stone’s throw from the road and a 40-minute walk from El Porvenir is
Totaizal. This friendly and well-organized village of 140 people lies hidden
in the forest of the Chimane reserve. The Chimane, traditionally a nomadic
forest tribe, have in recent times faced expulsion from their ancestral lands
by lumber companies and highland settlers. Skilled hunters, the Chimane
people have a fascinating way of fishing, using natural poisons to kill their
prey. They are also highly adept at collecting wild honey and avoiding
ballistic bees. People living in the settlement of Cero Ocho, a four-hour
walk from Totaizal, trudge into the village to sell bananas, while others
provide guiding services for visitors. You can visit the village of Totaizal,
but you’ll have to make prior arrangements through El Porvenir.
Tours
El Porvenir
(cerrado hike per person B$120) Theoretically the El Porvenir station can
organize a variety of tours with enough notice, though these are more
difficult to arrange during the wet season. The most popular are the fourhour canoe trips to see the black caimans in Laguna Normandia (per
person B$80); a four-hour cerrado hike to the monkey-rich rainforest
islands; and a full-day Las Torres tour (per person with food B$250) on
horseback to three wildlife-viewing towers where you can observe both
cerrado (savanna) and rainforest ecosystems, and also fish for piranhas for
dinner.
If you’re a bird fanatic, take the Loro tour (per person B$80) on foot or
horseback to see the colorful spectacle of macaws and parakeets coming to
roost – or you can check them out in the palms at El Porvenir, where they
provide a natural 6am alarm clock.
LODGE
The most interesting but also the most taxing option is the four-day Tur
Monitoreo (per person without/with food B$600/700), during which visitors
accompany park rangers on their wildlife monitoring rounds into the furthest
reaches of the reserve. You will need your own camping gear for this and, of
course, plenty of insect repellent, but you’ll have a great shot at seeing
monkeys, macaws and pink river dolphins.
To go into the rainforest beyond Laguna Normandia, you’ll definitely
need a guide. It’s a four-hour walk from the lake to the edge of the
secondary-growth rainforest. A further four hours’ walk takes you into the
primary forest. Along the way, a 6m viewing tower provides a vista over an
island of rainforest, and a 4m tower along the Río Curiraba provides views
over the forest and savanna in the remotest parts of the reserve.
Sleeping & Eating
El Porvenir $$
(per person incl food dm/camping B$100/50) Accommodations at El
Porvenirare are in airy bunk-bed rooms. Its fine when it’s hot, but in cold
weather you might wish you had brought your sleeping bag. Amenities
include a library, a researchers’ workshop, an interpretive center, and a small
cultural and biological museum. There’s plenty of drinkable water but
consider bringing snacks and refreshments as there is nowhere to buy
anything for miles around.
Information
The reserve is administered by SERNAP in La Paz in conjunction with a
local committee of representatives. Admission to the biosphere reserve is
B$35 per person. Horse rentals are available from around B$70 per eighthour day.
The best months to visit the reserve are June and July, when there’s little
rain and the days are clear; bring warm clothing to protect against the
occasional surazo. During the rainy season, days are hot, wet, muggy and
miserable with mosquitoes, so bring plenty of repellent.
PLAZA
Getting There & Away
El Porvenir is 200m off the highway, 90 minutes east of San Borja, and is
accessible via any movilidad (anything that moves) between Trinidad and
San Borja or Rurrenabaque – ask your driver to drop you at the entrance. In
the dry season Trinidad-bound buses mainly pass in the morning between
9am and 11am, those for San Borja usually in the late afternoon between
4pm and 7pm. Otherwise there’s surprisingly little traffic. Note that this
route is in a dismal state and often closed during the rainy season, so check
the weather forecast before setting out to avoid getting stranded.
San Ignacio de Moxos
 3 / POP 20,500
San Ignacio de Moxos is a friendly, tranquil indigenous Moxos village,
92km west of Trinidad, that dedicates itself to agriculture and oozes an
ambience quite distinct from any other Bolivian town. The people speak an
indigenous dialect known locally as ignaciano, and their lifestyle, traditions
and food are unique in the country. The best time to visit San Ignacio is
during the annual festival on July 30 and 31. This is when the villagers let
their hair down and get their feather headgear up, and don’t stop drinking,
dancing and letting off fireworks for three days.
The village was founded as San Ignacio de Loyola by the Jesuits in 1689.
In 1749 it suffered pestilence and had to be shifted to its present location on
healthier ground.
Sights & Activities
Main Plaza
(museum B$10; church 8am-7pm) In the main plaza is a monument to
Chirípieru, El Machetero Ignaciano, with his crown of feathers and
formidable-looking hatchet, a look that’s re-created extensively during the
village festival. The church on the plaza was restored and rebuilt from 1995
to 2003 and adopts the familiar Jesuit style with a wide roof supported by
LAKE
wooden columns, though they are noticeably smooth and without decoration
in this example. If you get a small group together, one of the church workers
will take you around for a small fee.
At the museum in the Casa Belén, near the northwest corner of the plaza,
you’ll see elements of both the Ignaciano and Moxos cultures, including the
bajones, the immense flutes introduced by the Jesuits.
Laguna Isirere
North of town at the large Laguna Isirere, you can go fishing and swimming,
observe the profuse bird life and watch the gorgeous sunset. A statue on the
shores depicts the local legend about the formation of the lake. A young boy
named Isidoro was paddling in a small pool when he was swallowed up by
the waters, the work of the mischievous water spirit Jichi who needed a
human sacrifice in order to turn the pool into the lake it is today. It’s
accessible on a 30-minute walk or by hitchhiking from town.
The greater area also boasts a number of obscure – and hard-to-reach –
places of interest: the Lomas de Museruna, several archaeological ruins,
and the ruins of the missions San José and San Luis Gonzaga.
FIESTA DE MOXOS
Annually, 2pm on July 30 marks the first day of celebrations of the huge Fiesta del Santo Patrono
de Moxos, held in honor of San Ignacio, the sacred protector of the Moxos. This is one of the best
festivals in the Amazon and if you’re in Bolivia during this time, you’d be crazy to miss it.
Strictly speaking, the festival begins on July 22 and gets off to a strange start. The small statue
of Santiago from the church is paraded and worshipped each evening until July 25 (Día de la
Fiesta de Santiago), after which point the same statue is then worshipped as an image of San
Ignacio for the rest of the fiesta ! During this time each family in the village brings an image of
San Ignacio to the church and places it there in his honor. These solemn processions continue for
another four days before the real festivities begin.
On July 30, a procession leaves from the church incorporating macheteros (local youths
dressed in white with remarkable radial headdresses traditionally made from macaw feathers),
achus (village elders with wooden masks and hats bearing fireworks) and musicians beating out
the tunes of the unique Moxos music – using drums, enormous bamboo pan-pipes and flutes. One
by one the procession visits every house in the village, returning the images of San Ignacio that
had been deposited in the church and receiving food and drink in return. The winding route ends
at the church, where they attend Mass, its close signifying the end of formalities and the
beginning of festivities.
PENSION
PENSION
PENSION
INTERNATIONAL
The evening of the first day of fiesta starts with huge fireworks let off by two rich local
families outside the church, who ‘compete’ through the lavishness of their displays. Then it’s
over to the achus, men and women wearing large, high-topped leather hats with firecrackers
fizzling on the top, who run through the crowd, while everyone shrieks and runs away, laughing
and screaming – children have a particularly good time. Fresh river fish is eaten in abundance,
plenty of drinking takes place (as you’ll see by the number of booze-casualties sleeping in the
streets) and local artesanía (handcrafted items) are displayed around the village.
On the morning of the second day another Mass is held. The small statue of San Ignacio is
returned to the church and a larger statue of the same saint is extracted for the first time to lead a
second procession, one that is this time accompanied by local politicians, religious authorities,
invited dignitaries and others worthy of a bigger statue. Once the formalities are dispensed with,
it’s party time again. The second and third days are filled with lots of dancing and bull-teasing,
when the (drunk) locals attempt to get the bulls’ attention. A few days later, San Ignacio goes
back to its quiet life, only to go wild again the following year.
Sleeping & Eating
Plenty of accommodations are available in town, though quality varies from
rustic to ‘only in an emergency’! Note that prices double during the fiesta,
but visitors can camp at established sites just outside town during the
festivities.
Plaza Hotel $
( 482-2032; per person B$70, without bathroom B$50) On the plaza, a
cheery option with bright, spacious doubles with fans.
Residencial Don Joaquín $
( 482-8012; Montes; per person B$80, without bathroom B$50) At the
corner of the plaza near the church, it offers a nice patio and clean, simple
rooms.
Residencial 31 de Julio $
(per person without bathroom B$30) A block off the plaza, this friendly
place maintains clean and basic rooms.
Restaurante Moxos $$
BOLIVIAN
(3 blocks north of plaza; mains B$30-40) The already functioning restaurant,
of the soon to be functioning (maybe?) Hotel Ecoturístico Moxos. This is
part of a Trinidad-run project to provide a more upscale service for visitors.
La Cabaña del Gordo $
Offline map Google map
(St Esteban; mains B$20) A local favorite that specializes in traditional
Moxos dishes.
Getting There & Away
San Ignacio is located smack-bang in the middle of the notoriously poor
Trinidad–San Borja road, which is impassable following periods of rain.
From March to October, it’s four hours from Trinidad to San Ignacio,
including the balsa crossing of the Río Mamoré, but this route is often
closed during the rainy season. If you’re making your own way note that the
balsa closes at 6pm (it may stay open later at times of heavy traffic) and
there are no accommodations on either side, so check the timing before
setting out.
By far the easiest access is from Trinidad, with camionetas (open-backed
4WDs) running when full from the parada at 1 de Mayo near Velarde (B$70,
four hours). San Borja–bound bus services pass through San Ignacio in the
early afternoon but take considerably longer (B$50, six hours). During
intense periods of rain and during the festival, flights to Trinidad may be
offered. The tiny Moxos airport is at the top end of Av Aeropuerto but you’ll
have to ask around for information.
From San Borja, several buses to San Ignacio (B$40, five hours)
theoretically leave daily. In the wet season camionetas (per person B$100)
replace the buses, but they are frequently canceled if the drivers don’t need
the work. Sporadic departures to Rurrenabaque leave during the dry season
only, but it’s usually easier to catch a lift to San Borja and take one of the
more frequent micros from there.
THE AMAZONIAN EL DORADO
In the Llanos de Moxos, between San Ignacio de Moxos and Loreto, the heavily forested
landscape is crossed with more than 100km of canals and causeways and dotted with hundreds of
lomas (artificial mounds), embankments and fanciful prehistoric earthworks depicting people and
animals. One anthropomorphic figure measures more than 2km from head to toe – a rainforest
variation on Peru’s famed Nazca Lines. The original purpose of the earthworks was probably to
permit cultivation in a seasonally flooded area, but inside the mounds were buried figurines,
pottery, ceramic stamps, human remains and even tools made from stone imported into the
region.
The discovery of the lomas has caused scientists to look at the Beni region with entirely new
eyes: what was previously considered to be a wilderness never touched by humans, save for a
few dispersed tribes who inhabited the region, is now thought to have been an area where a vast,
advanced civilization farmed, worked and lived in a highly structured society with sophisticated
cities.
It is believed that the ceramic mounds came from the large numbers of people who lived on
them and who ate and drank from pots, which were then destroyed and buried to improve soil
stability. Archaeologists say that the sheer amount of pots indicates the complexity of this lost
society.
Romantics associate the prehistoric structures of the Beni with the legendary Paititi tribe, and
infer that this ancient Beni civilization was the source of the popular Spanish legends of the
rainforest El Dorado known as Gran Paititi. The Patiti were said to be an Inca tribe associated
with the cultural hero Inkarri who, after founding Cuzco, retired to the Amazon to found another
great but mysterious civilization in an unknown location. Though some Inca fragments were
found in northern Bolivia during excavations in 2003, the Inca origin of the Moxos sites remains
doubtful, and the most accepted theory is that if Paititi even existed at all its most likely location
is Peru.
Archaeologists continue their research into this fascinating part of history, but one thing is for
sure: once you know what lies here in terms of world history, you’ll never look at the forests of
the Beni in the same way again.
EASTERN BOLIVIAN AMAZON
Trinidad, the Bolivian Amazon’s main population center, is still very much a
frontier settlement, though it’s also an access point for dozens of smaller
communities, wild rivers and remote jungle reserves. The eastern side of the
Amazon hides spectacular wildernesses and reserves of difficult access that
are a rewarding challenge for the intrepid ecotourist.
Trinidad
 3 / POP 80,000 / ELEV 235M (771FT)
Trinidad is the place you’ll come to if you’re after a trip down the long and
deep Río Mamoré, or on your way between Santa Cruz and Rurrenabaque.
Despite its colonial architecture and colonnaded streets, it’s a modern town
that is growing rapidly. Its most notable feature is the massive, green,
tropical main square (Trinidad is only 14 degrees south of the equator), once
home to a population of friendly sloths.
The city of La Santísima Trinidad (the Most Holy Trinity) was founded in
1686 by Padre Cipriano Barace as the second Jesuit mission in the flatlands
of the southern Beni. It was originally constructed on the banks of the Río
Mamoré, 14km from its present location, but floods and pestilence along the
riverbanks necessitated relocation. In 1769 it was moved to the Arroyo de
San Juan, which now divides the city in two.
A2
Tr
i
n
i
d
a
d
 Top Sights
Parque Pantanal
C1
C2
C3
C2
B3
B3
B3
B2
B3
B3
B3
B3
D2
B3
C4
C3
A3
B4
C3
D2
(see 9)
B3
D3
C3
B3
C3
B3
B2
 Sights 1 La Vaca y El Toro Statue 2 Plazuela Natuch 3 Trinidad Cathedral
 Activities, Courses & Tours 4 Fremen Tours 5 Turismo Moxos
 Sleeping 6 Hostal El Tajibo 7 Hostal Sirari 8 Hotel Aguahí 9 Hotel Campanario
10 Hotel Colonial 11 Hotel Gran Moxos/Palace VIP
12 Hotel Jacarandá Suites
13 Mi Residencia
14 Residencial Santa Cruz
 Eating
15 Churrasquería La Estancia
16 Club Social
17 El Balcón
18 El Tabano
19 La Casona
20 La Choza del Pescador
Los Farroles
 Information
21 Armonía Office
22 Immigration Office
23
Tourist Office
 Transport
24 AeroCon
25 Alquiler de Motos
26 Amaszonas
27
TAM
PLAZA
MUSEUM
MUSEUM
ZOO
PLAZA
Sights
Plaza Gral José Ballivián
Trinidad’s loveliest feature is Plaza Gral José Ballivián, with its tall, tropical
trees, lush gardens and community atmosphere. You can spend a pleasant
evening eating ice cream and listening to the rhythmic drone of hundreds of
motorcycles orbiting around the square. In the past, the traffic was refereed
by a police officer who sat in a big wooden chair and conjured up red,
yellow and green traffic lights by touching an electric wire against one of
three nails. On the south side of the plaza, the cathedral (Plaza Gral José
Ballivián; admission free), built on the site of an earlier Jesuit church, is an
unimpressive building that doesn’t even have its own bells – the on-the-hour
bell ringing is played from a recording.
Ken Lee Ethno-Archaeological Museum
(Av Ganadera; admission B$5; 8am-noon & 3-6pm) This Spanish-funded
museum north of the center is considered the city´s top cultural attraction. It
exhibits artefacts from the Trinidad region, including traditional instruments
and tribal costumes.
Museo Ictícola
(admission B$5; 8am-noon & 3-6pm Mon-Fri) At the university 1.5km
north of town along Cipriano Barace is the Museo Ictícola, an extensive
aquarium featuring 400 species of Amazonian fish.
Parque Pantanal
Offline map Google map
(Av Laureano Villar; admission free; 8am-6pm) On the road to the airport
this wooded park is a nice place to while away a few hours while admiring
the rehabilitated wildlife that roams free around you. There are several deer
here and also some anacondas in the ponds, so watch your toes!
Plazuela Natuch
Offline map Google map
(Nicolás Suárez at Av del Mar) Worth a quick look for the colourful Beni
wall murals and statues of native wildlife, including a prone jaguar and a
family of capybara. There are usually some stalls selling local artesanía, as
well as canoodling teenagers.
DOWN THE LAZY RIVER
River trips from Trinidad will carry you to the heart of the Bolivian Amazon along the Río
Mamoré, where you’ll experience the mystique and solitude for which the rainforests are
renowned. For optimum enjoyment, visit during the dry season, which lasts roughly from May or
June until some time in October.
Although the scenery along the northern rivers changes little, the diversity of plant and animal
species along the shore picks up any slack in the pace of the journey. The longer your trip, the
deeper you’ll gaze into the forest darkness and the more closely you’ll scan the riverbanks for
signs of movement. Free of the pressures and demands of active travel, you’ll have time to relax
and savor the passing scene.
In general, the riverboat food is pretty good, but meals consist mainly of masaco (mashed
yucca or plantains), served with charque (dried meat) , rice, noodles, thin soup and bananas in
every conceivable form. After a couple of days you’ll probably start dreaming of pizza, so bring
along some treats to supplement the daily fare. It’s also wise to carry your own water or some
form of water purification.
You’ll need to be quite resourceful to organize your trip. Ask around at the Capitanía in Puerto
Almacén (moto-taxi B$15) 8km southwest of Trinidad and be sure to discuss sleeping
arrangements before setting out. Passengers must usually bring their own hammocks (available in
Trinidad), but you may be allowed to sleep on deck or on the roof of the boat. You’ll also need a
sleeping bag or a blanket, especially in winter, when jungle nights can be surprisingly chilly. If
you’re fortunate enough to be on a boat that travels through the night, a mosquito net isn’t
necessary, but on boats that tie up at night, passengers without a mosquito net will find the
experience ranges from utterly miserable to unbearable.
The Guayaramerín run takes up to a week (larger boats do it in three to four days) and costs
around B$350 including food, B$250 without. South to Puerto Villarroel, smaller boats take five
days and cost about B$250 including meals.
For a plusher river affair, get on Fremen Tours’ posh hotel-boat Flotel Reina de Enin.
Tours
Several agencies run tours into the city’s hinterlands.
TOUR
TOUR
RELIGIOUS
PENSION
HOTEL
Turismo Moxos
Offline map Google map
( 462-1141; turmoxos@entelnet.bo; 6 de Agosto 114) Turismo Moxos
organizes three-day dolphin cruises on the Río Ibare, visits to Sirionó
villages, four-day canoe safaris into the jungle and one-day horseback trips
into remote areas.
Fremen Tours boat
( 462-2726; www.andes-amazonia.com; Cipriano Barace 332) Fremen
Tours specializes in all- inclusive river cruises. Trips are booked through the
offices in Cochabamba ( Click here ).
Festivals & Events
Fiesta de la Santísima Trinidad
The town’s mid-June founding fiesta is a big, loud, drunken party at the
Plaza de la Tradición, and features the climbing of greased poles for prizes
and a hocheadas de toros (teasing of bulls).
Sleeping
Most hotels offer cheaper rooms with fan and more expensive rooms with
air-conditioning. The latter is a wise investment.
Hostal Sirari $
Offline map Google map
( 462-4472; Santa Cruz 538; s/d B$100/160, with air-con B$160/200; )
A step up in quality without the step up in price. Rooms are whitewashed,
sparkling new and in comparison to other Trinidad hostels worth more than
what you pay. There is a small courtyard with tame toucans that beg for your
breakfast scraps.
Hotel Jacarandá Suites $$
Offline map Google map
HOTEL
HOTEL
HOTEL
HOTEL
( 462-2400; La Paz near Pedro de la Rocha; s/d B$300/420; ) For a
long time taking the mantle of Trinidad’s undisputed best hotel, this is a
modern, smart place with an upscale clientele. All rooms are minisuites with
air-conditioning, some of which have small balconies overlooking the leafy
courtyard. Enjoy a cocktail in the Tropical Bar or cool off in the pool.
Hotel Campanario $$$
Offline map Google map
( 462-4622; www.hotel-campanario.com; Av 6 de Agosto 80; s/d
B$300/480, ste B$650-750; ) As the newest top-end hotel on the
scene in Trinidad, Hotel Camapanario is aiming to capitalize on an increase
in wealthy business travelers from Santa Cruz by offering a series of highclass rooms and suites. Suites are tastefully decorated and airy, with colorful
bed spreads, and the pool access and air-conditioning contribute toward what
should be a pleasant stay.
Mi Residencia $$
Offline map Google map
( 462-1543; Felix Pinto 555; s/d B$250/400; ) A flashy entrance
through a wooden gate takes you into the smooth, glass-fronted reception
here. The large rooms are decked out in loud, kitsch designs, and each has a
TV and fridge. The hotel is a 10-minute walk from the main plaza.
Hotel Aguahí $$
Offline map Google map
( 462-5569; Bolívar at Santa Cruz; s/d/tr B$320/440/560; ) The
rooms are large, the beds comfortable and there is a large, figure-of-eight
pool in the spacious, tropical garden.
Hostal El Tajibo $
Offline map Google map
( 462-2324; Santa Cruz 423; s/d B$100/150, with air-con B$200/250; )
One of Trinidad’s better-value budget options, this hotel has attractive,
almost stylish rooms and comfortable beds. Some rooms have balconies
HOTEL
HOTEL
PENSION
BARBECUE
overlooking the street and breakfast is included with air-con rooms. Ask
about reductions when it is quiet
Hotel Colonial $
Offline map Google map
( 462-2864; Vaca Diez 76; s/d B$100/150, with air-con B$200/250; ) If
El Tajibo is full, the same owners run the carbon-copy Colonial a couple of
blocks further on from the plaza. It’s almost identical, from the decor right
down to the price.
Hotel Gran Moxos/Palace VIP $$
Offline map Google map
( 462-8777; www.hotelmoxos.com.bo; 6 de Agosto 146; s/d B$140/240,
with air-con B$240/360; ) Despite the shabby-looking reception, this isn’t
a bad hotel, though an attack of the hyperboles was obviously involved in its
naming. Rooms are carpeted, comfortable and characterless, with breakfast
included and served in the cafe downstairs.
Residencial Santa Cruz $
Offline map Google map
( 462-0711; Santa Cruz 537; s/d B$80/140, s without bathroom B$60) A
budget place that makes a real effort to cheer up its rooms with colorful
decor, hand-painted wall hangings and bright bedclothes. Rooms on the 1st
floor are airier (and slightly pricier). All rooms have cable TV.
Eating & Drinking
For a city of its size, Trinidad disappoints with the quality of its restaurants
and, despite being in the heart of Beni cattle country, it can be surprisingly
difficult to get a decent steak.
Churrasquería La Estancia $$$
Offline map Google map
INTERNATIONAL
SEAFOOD
INTERNATIONAL
SEAFOOD
(Ibare near Velarde; B$40-120) Ask anybody in Trinidad where to get a
good bit of beef and you will be sent here. With its palm roof and coal-fire
barbecue hamming up the ranch-house setting, the succulent and juicy cuts
will make you wonder how other restaurants even dare to call themselves
churrasquerías (grilled meat restaurants).
Los Farroles $$$
Offline map Google map
(6 de Agosta, near 18 de Noviembre; almuerzo B$25, mains B$30-130)
Don’t fall out of your chair! They serve salads here! In fact this upmarket
(by Trinidad standards) restaurant serves a bit of everything from pizza and
steak to chicken and fish. It’s the restaurant of the swish Hotel Campanario,
but that doesn’t stop them from offering a well-cooked and excellent value
almuerzo (set lunch) as well.
El Tabano $$
Offline map Google map
(Villavicencio, near Mamoré; mains B$20-55) With cool beers and cocktails
served in the courtyard, this grass-roofed resto-pub is a popular place with
Trinidad’s young crowd on account of its lively atmosphere and excellent
food. The menu consists of a number of inventive variations on fish and
caiman dishes.
El Balcón $$$
Offline map Google map
(6 de Agosta, near Tarija; mains B$35-70; dinner only) Named
presumably for the cramped wooden balconies outside, this is one of the
more popular eating spots for couples. It’s hardly an experience in fine
dining, but the meat and chicken dishes are well prepared.
La Choza del Pescador $$
Offline map Google map
(Bolívar at Velasco; mains B$40-55) There’s not much on the menu here,
just fish cooked in about five different ways, but if you are feeling fishy then
this is a good place to drop anchor.
BOLIVIAN
INTERNATIONAL
ARTS & CRAFTS
Club Social $$$
Offline map Google map
(Suárez; almuerzo B$20, mains B$25-60) Right on the plaza, in a shady,
breezy courtyard, the lovely social club is a local family favorite. The
generous two-course lunch menu includes soup, meat, rice and veg. The
dinner menu isn’t such good value.
La Casona $$$
Offline map Google map
(east side of Plaza Gral José Ballivián; almuerzo B$15, mains B$25-100)
Trinidad’s most-famous restaurant unfortunately doesn’t live up to the hype.
Give the greasy and overpriced à la carte meals a miss and stick to the
lunchtime almuerzo.
Shopping
Centro Artesanal Moxos
( 462-2751; Bopi) Local Beni crafts, including weavings, woodwork and
ceramics, are sold at the Centro Artesanal Moxos, 300m southwest of town
along the river. Look out for the pifano, an indigenous flute made from the
wing bone of the Jabiru stork using a technique more than 1000 years old –
it’s the staple instrument of the unique Moxos music.
Information
Dangers & Annoyances
Use bottled water for everything in Trinidad except your shower. The town
water supply is contaminated.
Immigration
Immigration office Offline map Google map ( 462-1449; Av Los Tajibos,
near Ibañez Carranza) Top floor of the white building a block from the bus
terminal.
Money
Several Enlace ATMs near the main plaza accept international cards – this is
a good spot to get some cash before heading out to the Amazon proper.
Moneychangers gather on Av 6 de Agosto between Suárez and Av 18 de
Noviembre.
Prodem (Vaca Diez) Just off the plaza for cash advances.
Tourist information
Tourist office Offline map Google map ( 462-1322; Felix Pinto; 8.30am12.30pm & 2.30-6pm Mon-Fri)
Telephone & Internet
Telephone cabins and internet access (B$4 per hour) are on almost every
block, with a notable concentration along 6 de Agosto near the plaza.
Getting There & Away
Air
Departing air travelers must pay B$7 for use of the Jorge Henrich Arauz
airport, which is just outside the northwest corner of town along Av
Laureano Villar (moto-taxi B$7).
Amaszonas ( 462-2426; 18 de Noviembre 267) shuttles daily to La Paz,
sometimes via San Borja and has regular flights to Cobija, Riberalta and
Guayaramerín. AeroCon Offline map Google map ( 462-4442; 18 de
Noviembre, near 6 de Agosto) handles several daily flights to Santa Cruz,
Riberalta and Cobija. TAM Offline map Google map ( 462-2363; Bolívar at
Santa Cruz) has a couple of flights a week to Cochabamba and La Paz.
Bus & Camioneta
The rambling bus terminal is a 10-minute walk east of the center. Several
flotas depart nightly between 6pm and 10pm for Santa Cruz (normal/ bus
cama B$53/125, eight to 10 hours). A number of companies theoretically
serve Rurrenabaque (B$130, 17 to 30 hours) daily via San Borja (B$50,
eight to 12 hours), though from November to May these services are
typically suspended. There are also daily dry-season departures to Riberalta
(B$200, 17 to 30 hours) and Guayaramerín (B$240, 22 to 35 hours).
Camionetas (pickup trucks) run to San Ignacio de Moxos (B$70, four
hours) when full from the parada at 1 de Mayo near Velarde. Buses (B$50,
six hours) occasionally run from the terminal around 9am but departures are
increasingly sporadic.
Getting Around
To/From the Airport
Taxis to and from the airport charge around B$25, but if you don’t have
much luggage, moto-taxis are cheaper (B$10) – you’ll be surprised how
much luggage they can accommodate with a bit of creativity.
Motorcycle
Motorcycles are a great way to while the day away – for B$15 per hour or
B$80 for a full day you can rent a bike and join the general public in
whizzing around the square. Pick one up from Alquiler de Motos Offline map
Google map (Main Plaza; 8am-6pm), or alternatively strike a private deal
with a moto-taxi driver (though you can expect to be followed!). You’ll need
a regular driver’s license from home.
Taxi
Moto-taxis around town cost B$3, while increasingly scarce car taxis charge
B$10. For rides to outlying areas, phone Radio Taxi German Busch (
462-0008), or look for one on the plaza. Bank on around B$40 per hour for
up to four people, including waiting time.
Santuario Chuchini
The Santuario Chuchini (Jaguar’s Lair), 14km northwest of Trinidad, is one
of the few easily accessible ‘Paititi’ sites. This wildlife sanctuary sits on an
8-hectare loma (artificial mound), one of many dotted throughout the
surrounding forest. From the camp, you can take short walks in the rainforest
to lagoons with caimans, other large animals and profuse bird life.
The camp has shady, covered picnic sites, trees, children’s swings, and a
variety of native plants, birds and animals. There’s also an archaeological
museum displaying articles excavated from the loma, including bizarre
statues as well as a piece that appears to be a female figure wearing a bikini
(it’s actually thought to be an identification of, and homage to, specific body
areas rather than an article of clothing).
For a day visit, including admission, a three-hour cruise and a meal, the
price is B$450; to stay overnight it’s B$850. Package tours booked in
Trinidad may work out a bit cheaper. Further information is available from
Lorena or Efrém Hinojoso ( 462-1968), or travel agencies in Trinidad.
Unless you organize a tour, which will include transportation, you’ll have
to negotiate with a moto-taxi driver. The road isn’t great, so you’ll have to be
very persuasive and expect to be charged a bit more than usual. It’s also a
good destination for those who’ve rented motorcycles. If you’re not staying,
exotic dishes are available in the restaurant; the food is good but pricey.
Reserva de Vida Silvestre Ríos
Blanco y Negro
This 1.4-million-hectare reserve, created in 1990, occupies the heart of
Bolivia’s largest wilderness area and contains vast tracts of undisturbed
rainforest and cerrado with myriad species of plants and animals. These
include giant anteaters, peccaries, tapirs, jaguars, bush dogs, marmosets,
river otters, capuchin monkeys, caimans, squirrel monkeys, deer and
capybaras. The diverse bird life includes curassows, six varieties of macaw
and hundreds of other bird species.
The area’s only settlement, the privately owned estancia (ranch),
Perseverancia, is 350km north of Santa Cruz. It started as a rubber
production center in the 1920s, working until the last seringueros (rubber
tappers) left in 1972. When the airstrip was completed, professional hunters
went after nutrias and large cats. By 1986 the estancia had again been
abandoned, and it remained so until tourism – albeit scanty – began to be
promoted in 1989.
In the mid-1990s Moira logging concerns began encroaching on the
eastern portion of the reserve and USAID recommended that loggers clear a
section of the forest rather than cut selective trees. Things have calmed down
in recent years, though it is the difficulty of access to most of the park that
has been the reason for this, rather than a more effective program of
protection.
Getting There & Away
Perseverancia is most easily accessed by a 1½-hour charter flight from El
Trompillo airport in Santa Cruz. For those with a solid backside there’s a
100km 4WD track between Asunción de Guarayos and Perseverancia that’s
passable year-round – with considerable perseverance. Currently no tour
companies run trips to the park.
PARQUE NACIONAL NOEL KEMPFF
MERCADO
The wonderfully remote and globally important Noel Kempff Mercado National Park is home to
a broad spectrum of Amazonian flora and fauna and has a wide range of dwindling habitats, from
open cerrado to dense rainforest. The park lies in the northernmost reaches of Santa Cruz
department, between the banks of the Ríos Verde, Guaporé (Río Iténez on Bolivian maps) and
Paraguá. It encompasses more than 1.5 million hectares of the most dramatic scenery in northern
Bolivia, including rivers, rainforests, waterfalls, plateaus and rugged 500m escarpments.
An attempt to generate a tourist trail to the park appears to have failed, and more recently
loggers and ranchers have started to move into the region. The park still remains an exciting offthe-beaten-track option for adventurous independent travelers though, but a lack of infrastructure
for visitors means that visiting is a challenge that should be taken seriously. Camps at La Florida,
Flor de Oro and Los Fierros have not been maintained, but with a little local advice and some
serious planning a fascinating frontier awaits. If you are really lucky you may be able to convince
a Santa Cruz tour agency to take you, but expect conditions to be basic and costs to be high.
The park is administered by SERNAP and every prospective visitor to the park must first visit
a park information office in La Paz or Santa Cruz to register their visit.
HOTEL
NORTHERN BOLIVIAN
AMAZON
The isolated, once-untouched rainforests of northern Bolivia’s frontier
attract only the intrepid, the renegade and the loggers. Fire, chainsaws and
cattle are guzzling the wilderness at increasing speed, but the rare visitor in
search of the unexplored and untamed will have their sense of adventure
tickled. Facilities are scarce and travel is slow: perfect for those who really
want to avoid the gringo trail.
Santa Ana de Yacuma
 3 / POP 22,400
A real cowboy town (in the nicest possible way), populated by ranchers,
farmhands and, of course, cows. Santa Ana is the main population center in
this area of Beni and is proud to call itself the cattle capital of Bolivia, a
title that has resulted in officially the highest standard of living in the
Bolivian Amazon region.
Unless your visit coincides with the annual town festival (July 24),
during which cattle-related activities unsurprisingly play a starring role,
there isn’t much to do in town and you are most likely to land here en route
to Los Lagos or the Barba Azul Reserve.
Sleeping & Eating
A variety of basic residenciales cluster in the streets around the plaza
offering cheap accommodations to the needy.
Hotel Mamoré $$
( 337-8294; Roca Suárez; s/d B$250/350; ) Out by the airstrip this
four-star place is hands down the best in town. Bad news is that the
ranchers know it too, so if you want a room you’re best to book it in
advance.
Getting There & Away
Land routes to and from Santa Ana de Yacuma operate in the dry season
only, but because of the thriving local industry there are frequent trufi
departures (B$150, four hours) from the landmark La Vaca y El Toro statue
at the northern end of Cipriano Barace in Trinidad. Once in town onward
transport to Los Lagos or the Barba Azul reserve needs to be negotiated
locally or arranged in advance.
Barba Azul Reserve
Thanks to the efforts of the conservation NGO Armonía, the squawkily
endangered blue-throated macaw or barba azul has become something of a
regional celebrity in the Bolivian Amazon. Endemic to the unique Beni
savannas, a fast-disappearing habitat found nowhere else on earth, a quarter
of the world’s minute population of this spectacular psittacid calls this
5000-hectare private reserve home. Unlike most of the surrounding
savanna, the open grasslands here are completely ungrazed and the birds
can be seen relatively easily along with a plethora of other threatened birds
and mammals such as maned wolf, giant anteater and marsh deer.
Accommodations are at the fledgling research station, but logistics
demand a minimum three-night stay. A memorable stay here costs US$150
per person per night, including food, access to a motorboat and horseback
riding.
Getting There & Away
For most of the year by far the quickest and easiest way to get to the reserve
is by chartering a plane from Trinidad or Santa Cruz. Ask around at the
aircraft hangars in Trinidad or try Aereos Magdalena ( 346-2226). Bank
on around US$250 per person per hour (based on four people) and at least
an hour flight time from Trinidad in good conditions. In the dry season
(July to October) land transportation can be arranged in Santa Ana de
Yacuma, but although it is only 80km, rough roads mean that the drive will
take at least three hours.
Your visit should be arranged in advance at the Armonía office ( 3-
462-8287; 18 de Noviembre 282; 8.30am-12.30pm & 2.30-6pm MonFri) in Trinidad and the staff may be able to help with transportation, or
contact Bird Bolivia ( Click here ) for a guided tour. Armonía can also
sometimes arrange shared flights to the reserve to reduce transportation
costs.
NATIONAL TREASURE: THE BARBA AZUL
With more than 1200 bird species inhabiting the country, Bolivia is a bird-watcher’s paradise.
But it’s not just the sheer quantity of species that makes Bolivia such an attractive destination
for bird lovers, it is the quality of the birds you can see.
Asociacíon Armonía, the Bolivian Birdlife International Partner, has developed a series of
community-based conservation programs designed to protect the country´s most threatened
birds, principally by creating a feeling of pride among the locals.
The gorgeous blue-throated macaw (Ara glaucogularis), endemic to the unique Beni
savannas, numbers, according to the most optimistic of estimates, just 250 individuals. Known
to the Bolivians as barba azul (blue beard), this charismatic bird has become a flagship species
for Armonía, which runs a superb, community-orientated conservation program aimed squarely
at making sure the bird is around for future generations to appreciate.
Threats to the species are numerous, but one of the most unusual is indiscriminate killing for
the sole purpose of harvesting the tail feathers. This practice affects all macaws, but because of
the species’ similarity to the common blue-and-yellow macaw (Ara ararauna) and a lack of
public awareness of its plight, this species has suffered at the hands of hunters who collect the
tail plumes to adorn ceremonial headdresses for regional celebrations like the famous Moxos
festival.
Armonia’s response has been rapid, effective and ingenious. It has worked on an extensive
public education campaign designed to teach locals how to distinguish between the two similar
blue macaws that occur in the area and, crucially, to instil a sense of pride in the citizens of Beni
for their emblematic bird. An agreement with local indigenous leaders not to hunt live macaws,
but to instead fabricate artificial feathers for headdresses has not only been a huge success, but
has led to the creation of a small and very lucrative local manufacturing industry. Perhaps most
important of all has been the purchase of the small Barba Azul Reserve dedicated to the
conservation of the bird.
Visit Armonía at its Santa Cruz office ( Click here ) or its Trinidad office ( Click here ) for
more information on its innovative conservation programs.
Los Lagos
North of Santa de Yacuma is a cluster of 11 wonderful natural lakes flanked
by wild rainforest and linked together by a network of weed-choked streams
which are known collectively as Los Lagos. The two largest lakes are Lagos
Ginebra and Rogaguado, both vast enough to be mistaken for inland seas,
but exploring the winding swampy creeks, where wildlife abounds and you
must trade your outboard motor in for a paddle, is where the real fun is at.
This unique and enchanting region has hardly been explored by foreign
tourists because of its remoteness, but for anybody looking for Amazonian
adventure it is a real treat. Whether you are an angler, a nature enthusiast,
wanting to relax or just somebody who appreciates a damn good sunset, Los
Lagos ticks all the right boxes.
Activities
Predictably, water-related activities are the main draw here and the area is
nationally famous with sports anglers who come to hook the predatory
tunare and the gigantic general, a catfish-like monster that can reach 200kg.
The fishing is extremely easy, though most is done at night to avoid the
constant harassment of piranhas.
Other aquatic activities can also be arranged from jet-skiing on the lake
to boat trips through dense forested swamps inhabited by deer, howler
monkeys, river dolphins and the comical hoatzin, a large, crested chickenlike bird whose flightless offspring hurl themselves into the water at your
approach. Boat trips are usually combined with forest walks on specially
prepared trails with occasional viewing towers that will give you a
wonderful panorama of your breathtaking surroundings.
LODGE
Sleeping
 Los Lagos Lodge $$$
( 337-8294; www.loslagoslodge.com; s/d US$100/ 150, 4-person cabins
US$130-180; ) Situated on the shore of the crystalline Lago Agua
Clara in the north of the Los Lagos region, this four-star hotel finds the
perfect balance between luxury and nature. Offering a series of packages for
visitors depending on their interests – fishing, wildlife watching, adrenalin
adventures – and well-trained guides, it is a visually stunning hotel in a
visually stunning region. It’s a favorite retreat for Beni ranchers, but for
most of the year you will have the place almost to yourself.
Getting There & Away
As with most places in this part of Beni, chartering a plane from Trinidad or
Santa Cruz is your safest bet if you want to get here as painlessly as
possible. Aereos Magdalena ( 346-2226) at the hangars in Trinidad
airport are a good bet for an aero-taxi. The flight takes about an hour and
costs around US$250 per person (based on four people). From July to
November land transport can be arranged in Santa Ana de Yacuma. It’s a
spectacular six-hour drive.
Guayaramerín
 3 / POP 40,450 / ELEV 130M (426FT)
Knocking on Brazil’s back door, Guayaramerín is twinned with the
Brazilian town of Guajará-Mirim on the other side of the Río Mamoré. This
lively town thrives on all kinds of trade (legal and illegal) with Brazil, and
its streets are full of dusty motorcycle tracks and markets heaving with
synthetic garments. It is now the northern terminus for river transportation
along the Río Mamoré.
TOUR
HOTEL
HOTEL
PENSION
BARBECUE
Tours
Mary’s Tours
( 855-3882; Oruro) Mary’s Tours conducts five-hour city tours of
Guayaramerín and Guajará-Mirim, as well as La Ruta de la Goma (The
Rubber Trail) to Cachuela Esperanza. You can also arrange one-day cruises
on the Río Yata or fishing trips to Rosario del Yata, plus it can help organize
flights.
Sleeping
Hotel Balneario San Carlos $$
( 855-3555; San Carlos, near 6 de Agosto; s/d B$190/260; ) The
choice for anyone here on business, this hotel has a restaurant, redundant
sauna, pool room and 24-hour hot water.
Hotel Santa Ana $
( 855-3900; 25 de Mayo 611; s/d with fan B$70/140, d with air-con
B$150; ) The best of the cluster of hotels on this corner, with spacious,
often air-conditioned rooms and some suites. Reasonable value, though be
sure to avoid the windowless rooms.
Hotel Litoral $$
( 855-3895; 25 de Mayo, near 16 de Julio; per person B$90, without
bathroom B$20) Relax in the clean rooms of this budget place, or chill out
in front of Brazilian soaps in its courtyard snack bar.
Eating & Drinking
Churrasquería Patujú $$
(6 de Agosto; mains B$30-50) This place serves up tasty, good-value steakoriented meals. The best place for a decent feed in the town center.
BARBECUE
ICE CREAM
FAST FOOD
Churrasquería Sujal $$
(mains B$35-55) This out-of-town steakhouse is a nice, quiet place, most
readily accessible by moto-taxi (B$15).
Heladería Pato Roca $
(main plaza; ice cream B$5-20) Renowned for its mountainous fruit and
ice-cream creations.
Snack Bar Antonella $
(main plaza; mains B$15-30) Pleasant place for a beer and a snack as you
watch the world go round the plaza.
Shopping
Thanks to its designation as a duty-free zone (authorities couldn’t fight the
illicit trade, so they decided to sanction it), Guayaramerín is a shopper’s
mecca. There’s nothing of exceptional interest, but there are lots of
counterfeit brand-name shoes and clothes, and fake brand-name electronic
goods. For artesanía, visit Caritas, near the airfield, which sells locally
produced wooden carvings for reasonable prices.
Information
There is a slow internet connection at Masas (per hr B$5) just off the plaza.
A block east of the plaza, the relatively efficient Brazilian consulate
Offline map Google map ( 855-3766; Beni & 24 de Septiembre; 9am-5pm
Mon-Sat) issues visas in three days. Money changers hanging around the
port area deal in US dollars, Brazilian reais and bolivianos. Prodem on the
corner of the plaza can give you cash advances on Visa and MasterCard.
Getting There & Away
Air
The airport is on the edge of town and the airline offices are on the nearby
16 de Julio, around the corner of 25 de Mayo. AeroCon ( 855-5025; 25
de Mayo, near Beni) runs daily flights to Trinidad with onward connections
to other cities. TAM ( 855-3924; Av 16 de Julio) flies to Riberalta on
Sunday mornings (B$130, 20 minutes) and has a daily flight to Trinidad
(B$523, 50 minutes), except Tuesday and Thursday. Amaszonas connects
Guayaramerín with Riberalta and Trinidad most days, though there is no
office in town. Flights to Cobija via Riberalta (per person B$600) are by
private rental avionetta (light aircraft) and must be full (five people) to
depart. Call Avionetta Ariel ( 852-3774) or El Capitán ( 7686-2742)
at least a day in advance.
Boat
Cargo boats up the Río Mamoré to Trinidad (around without/with food
B$250/350) leave very irregularly and take six days. Ask at the port
captain’s office opposite the immigration office for information.
Bus, Camión & Taxi
The bus terminal is on the south end of town, beyond the market. Buses run
to Riberalta (B$25, 2½ hours) several times daily. Foolhardy Vaca Diez
departs daily in the morning for Rurrenabaque (B$120, 18 hours to three
days) and La Paz (B$170, 30 to 60 hours) via Santa Rosa and Reyes. Do not
contemplate either journey if there is even a hint of rain or else be prepared
to help pull the bus out of muddy holes every couple of hours. There are
daily buses to Cobija (B$70, 16 hours) and Trinidad (B$240, 22 to 35
hours). Be aware that if enough tickets aren’t sold, any of these runs may be
summarily canceled. Flying to either destination is your best option and you
will not regret the extra expense. Shared taxis to Riberalta (B$50 per
person, two hours) leave from the terminal when they have four passengers.
CROSSING THE BORDER INTO BRAZIL
Crossing to Brazil from the northern Bolivian towns of Cobija and Guayaramerín involves
crossings of the Ríos Acre and Mamoré respectively.
Popping into the Brazilian town of Guajará-Mirim for the day from Bolivian Guayaramerín is
really easy. Day visits are encouraged, and you don’t even need a visa. Lanchas (B$10) across
the river leave from the port every half an hour from 6am to 6pm, and sporadically through the
night. To travel further into Brazil or to enter Bolivia, you’ll have to complete border
formalities. The immigration offices in Guajará-Mirim (Av Quintina Bocaiúva; 8am-noon
& 2-6pm Mon-Fri) and Guayaramerín (Av Costanera) are in the respective port areas.
It’s a long, hot slog across the bridge from Cobija to Brasiléia. Entry/exit stamps are available
at immigration in Cobija at the Bolivian end of the bridge and from Brasiléia’s Polícia Federal
(Av Prefeito Moreira; 8am-noon & 2-5pm). With some negotiation, taxis will take you to the
Polícia Federal in Brasiléia, wait while you clear immigration, then take you on to the center or
to the bus terminal. Alternatively, take the lancha (B$5) across the Río Acre; from there it’s
another 1.5km to the Polícia Federal.
Although officials don’t always check, technically everyone needs to have a yellow-fever
vaccination certificate to enter Brazil. If you don’t have one, head for the convenient and
relatively sanitary clinic at the port on the Brazilian side. For more information, check out
Lonely Planet’s Brazil.
Getting Around
Guayaramerín is small enough to walk just about anywhere. Moto-taxis and
auto rickshaws charge B$5 to anywhere in town. To explore the area, you
can rent motorcycles from the plaza for B$15 per hour or negotiate all-day
rentals – figure B$70 for 24 hours.
Riberalta
 3 / POP 76,000 / ELEV 115M (377FT)
Despite being a major town in Bolivia’s northern frontier region, Riberalta
has very little going for it, unless you count the exciting fact that this is one
of the world’s top Brazil-nut production sites. A crumbly place, it is
pleasant enough, even if the only thing to do is watch the orange sunsets
and circling motorcycles as you enjoy a beer on the plaza. According to
locals of both sexes, las riberalteñas are the most beautiful women in all of
Bolivia – but they would say that, wouldn’t they?
CHURCH
PARK
PARK
ARTS CENTER
SWIMMING
Sights & Activities
Cathedral
Riberalta’s cathedral is a wonderful structure in classic Missionary style,
wide and elegant, built using red brick and cedar. It sits on the main square
in the same spot as the old, less grandiose church and it cost more than half
a million US dollars to build.
Tumichucuá
Tumichucuá is a small resort about 5km outside town toward ‘El Triángulo’
(the road junction to Cobija). There is a lake for swimming and a forested
island with walking trails, plus basic cabins. Nobody is sure how far from
Riberalta it is, as according to local legend the lake moves at night,
sometimes coming to rest closer to the town, sometimes further away.
Parque Mirador La Costañera
This park, on Riberalta’s river bluff, overlooks a broad, sweeping curve of
the Río Beni and affords the standard Amazonian view over water and
rainforest.
Puerto Beni-Mamoré
At Puerto Beni-Mamoré, within walking distance of the center, you can
watch the hand-carving and construction of small boats and dugouts by
skilled artisans. About 2km east of the plaza along Ejército Nacional, you
can visit an old rubber plantation, watch coffee beans being roasted and
visit a carpentry workshop.
Club Náutico
(2 blocks north of the plaza; admission B$10) In the paralyzing heat of the
day, strenuous activity is suspended and you’ll find yourself clambering
into the nearest hammock. Cool down in the Club Náutico’s sparkling
riverside pool, a favorite local activity.
HOTEL
B&B
PENSION
INTERNATIONAL
Sleeping
Riberalta doesn’t see that many visitors so hotel prices are high and you
should not expect value for money.
Hotel Colonial $$
( 852-3018; www.hotelcolonial.web.bo; Plácido Méndez 745; s/d
B$180/250; ) Riberalta’s most-expensive hotel is a renovated colonial
home dotted with antique furniture and backed by a delightfully fresh
garden where you can relax in a hammock. Unfortunately, the rooms
themselves lack the same charm and some are just musty and old. Choose
carefully.
Hotel Las Palmeras $$
( 852-2354; Suárez 855; s B$150, s/d with air-con B$210/270; )
Salmon pinks shimmer in this quiet, family home-cum-B&B, 15 minutes’
walk from the center. The rooms are cozy and have their own bathrooms.
Rates include breakfast.
Residencial Los Reyes $
( 852-2628; s/d B$40/70) Close to the airport, this is a basic choice with a
lovely, cool, garden courtyard. Iced water and hot coffee are always
available.
Eating
Riberalta’s specialty is its famous nueces del Brasil (Brazil nuts), which are
roasted in sugar and cinnamon and sold at the bus terminals and airport for
B$10 per packet. The classic Riberalta breakfast of api (a syrupy beverage
made from sweet purple corn, lemon, cinnamon and lots of white sugar),
juice and empanadas is sold in the market.
 Tropical $$$
(near the airport; mains B$90-150) This is Riberalta’s most upscale
restaurant, leading the residents to nickname it Tropicarísimo (Very
BARBECUE
BOLIVIAN
Expensive…). Gargantuan portions of meat, chicken and fish accompanied
by salad, rice and fried manioc feed two or three normal-sized people,
though the profusion of animal skins and stuffed wildlife hanging off the
walls are a turn off.
Horno Camba $$
(Dr Martínez; mains B$25-55) The best of the restaurants on the plaza
serving fish, chicken and Beni beef. What’s more, the sidewalk seating
provides a front-row view of the nightly ‘Kawasaki derby’ round the plaza.
Club Social El Progreso $
(Dr Martínez; almuerzo B$15) This place serves inexpensive almuerzos,
good filtered coffee, drinks and fine desserts.
Information
Banco Ganadero on the plaza has an ATM. If it’s not working you can get
cash advances and change US dollars at Prodem ( 857-2212; Suárez
1880). The post office and Entel are near the main plaza and there is an
internet cafe (per hr B$6) on the plaza itself. The town’s municipal water
supply is contaminated, so stick to bottled or thoroughly purified water.
Getting There & Away
Air
The airport is a 15-minute stroll south of the main plaza. Departing flights
are subject to an airport tax of B$7. Flights to Cobija and most to
Guayaramerín are by avioneta and must be full to depart. Call Avioneta
Ariel ( 852-3774) or El Capitán ( 7686-2742) at least a day in
advance. Bank on paying around B$600 per person.
TAM ( 852-2646; Chuquisaca 1146) flies to La Paz daily (B$949, two
hours) except Monday and Friday, and has weekend flights to
Guayaramerín (B$130, 20 minutes). Flights to Trinidad leave on Monday,
Tuesday and Thursday (B$130, 20 minutes), but AeroCon ( 852-4679;
airport) departures to Trinidad are much more frequent, with several flights
each day. Amaszonas ( 852-3933; Chuquisaca cr Sucre) also flies to
Trinidad and has the most regular connections with Guayaramerín.
Boat
The Río Beni passes through countless twisting kilometers of virgin
rainforest and provides Bolivia’s longest single-river trip. Unfortunately,
boats upriver to Rurrenabaque are now rare and, in any case, they normally
only run during the wet season (November to mid-April). For information
on departures ask at the Capitanía del Puerto at the northern end of town
between Calles Ballivián and Sánchez. Budget on spending B$250 to
B$350 (including meals and hammock space) for the five- to eight-day trip.
Lucky Peru-bound travelers may also find cargo boats to the frontier at
Puerto Heath, which has onward boats to Puerto Maldonado.
Bus
The bus terminal is 3km east of the center, along the Guayaramerín road.
The road from Riberalta to Guayaramerín is a high-speed gravel track, and
taxis (B$40, 1½ hours) ply the route, leaving when full from the bus
terminal. Buses (B$25, 2½ hours) are cheaper but slower – they depart in
the morning.
All flotas between Guayaramerín and Cobija (B$120, 12 to 16 hours),
and the horrendously uncomfortable route via Rurenabaque (B$110, 17 to
40 hours) to La Paz (B$180, 35 to 60 hours), stop at Riberalta. Several
flotas also go to Trinidad (B$200, 17 to 30 hours) daily, though the road
may be closed during the wet season – it’s easier to fly.
Getting Around
Moto-taxis (day/night B$3.50/5) will take you anywhere. With a driver’s
license from home, you can rent motorcycles (per hour/day B$15/80) from
taxistas (taxi drivers) at the corner of Nicolás Suárez and Gabriel René
Moreno.
Riberalta to Cobija
The much-improved road between Riberalta and Cobija connects the onceisolated Pando department with the rest of the country. Unfortunately, better
access means more logging and the region has now been opened up to
indiscriminate exploitation of its natural resources with large tracts of virgin
rainforest being cleared at a frightening rate.
The journey requires two major balsa crossings, the first at Peña
Amarilla, two hours outside Riberalta crossing the Río Beni. On the western
bank, you can find stands selling empanadas and other snacks.
The most interesting crossing on the trip, however, traverses the Río
Madre de Dios. From the eastern port, the 45-minute crossing begins with a
500m cruise along a backwater tributary onto the great river itself. Along
the way listen for the intriguing jungle chorus that characterizes this part of
the country.
The crossing of the Río Orthon, at Puerto Rico, is by bridge. From Puerto
Rico to Cobija, development has been particularly rampant. The scene is
one of charred giants, a forest of stumps and smouldering bush; when
something is burning, the sun looks like an egg yolk through the dense
smoke.
Cobija
POP 22,300 / ELEV 140M (459FT)
Capital of the Pando and Bolivia’s wettest (1770mm of precipitation
annually) and most humid spot, Cobija sits on a sharp bend of the Río Acre.
Cobija means ‘covering’ and, with a climate that makes you feel as though
you’re being smothered with a soggy blanket, it certainly lives up to its
name.
Cobija was founded in 1906 under the name ‘Bahía,’ and in the 1940s it
boomed as a rubber-producing center. The town’s fortunes dwindled with
the shriveling of that industry and it has been reduced to little more than a
ARTS
CHURCH
MUSEUM
HOTEL
forgotten village, albeit with a Japanese-funded hospital and a high-tech
Brazil-nut processing plant.
Festivals
Feria de Muestras
The Pando’s biggest annual bash, the Feria de Muestras (August 18 to 27),
showcases the work of local artisans and is held at the extreme western end
of town, near the Río Acre.
Sights & Activities
The town rambles over a series of hills, giving it a certain desultory charm.
If you spend a day here, take a look at the remaining tropical wooden
buildings in the center, and the lovely avenues of royal palms around the
plaza.
Cathedral
The cathedral, on the main plaza, has a series of naive paintings from the
life of Christ.
Natural History Museum
(6 de Febrero; 8am-noon & 2-6pm Mon-Fri) A small natural history
museum is filled with the usual collection of pickled animal bits.
Sleeping & Eating
Most of the best places to eat are along Molina, but none are up to much
and prices are fairly high.
Hotel Nanijo´s $$
( 842-2230; 6 de Agosto 147; s/d B$200/350; ) A large, modern
hotel, with the best facilities in town. All rooms have tiled floors and cable
TV, and the courtyard splash pool is very welcome in the sticky climate.
INTERNATIONAL
CHINESE
Esquina de la Abuela $$$
(Molina nr Sucre; mains B$40-65) This is Cobija’s nicest eatery with
alfresco tables and fresh, well-cooked chicken and meat dishes served under
a gigantic palapa wigwam.
Hong Kong $$
(Molina; mains B$20-55) Standard Chinese fare in the usual big portions.
There is an authentic Chinese bakery next door for snacks.
Information
The Brazilian consulate ( 842-2110; Av René Barrientos; 8.30am12.30pm Mon-Fri) grants visas. Bolivian immigration ( 9am-5pm MonFri) is in the Prefectura building on the main plaza, with another branch at
the airport.
In addition to giving cash advances on Visa and MasterCard and
changing US dollars, Prodem (Plaza Principal 186) has an ATM; there are
a bunch of other ATMs around the plaza. The post office is also on the plaza
and a number of telephone places are nearby. Internet use is expensive (B$8
per hour) and to connect you’ll need to head to Calle Mercado, predictably
located next to the market.
Getting There & Away
Air
Flights arrive and depart from Aeropuerto Anibal Arab (CIJ), 5km from the
center at the top end of Av 9 de Febrero. Amaszonas (no office in town) and
AeroCon ( 842-4575; Leoncio Justiniano 43) between them have at least
daily flights to Trinidad. TAM ( 842-4145; Av 9 de Febrero 59) flies
daily to La Paz (B$746, two hours), except Sunday. Flights to
Guayaramerín via Riberalta are in avionetas; ask at the airport or call (
7621-0035). It pays to book your flights well in advance.
Bus & Camión
There is no bus terminal in Cobija, but buses pull into their respective
offices on Av 9 de Febrero out toward the airport. Services to Riberalta and
Guayaramerín (B$70, 16 hours) depart daily between 5am and 8am. There
is one tortuous service to La Paz via Rurrenabaque run by La Yungueña
(B$280, 35 to 60 hours), but if you are really smart, you’ll take a flight.
Getting Around
Moto-taxis charge a set B$4 to anywhere in town, B$10 to the airport. Taxis
charge B$20 to the international airport. A cheaper option is to hop on
micro A (B$2.50), which shuttles between the airport and the market.
Understand Bolivia
BOLIVIA TODAY
HISTORY
LIFE IN BOLIVIA
INDIGENOUS CULTURE
THE NATURAL WORLD
Top of section
Bolivia Today
In Bolivia crisis is the status quo. Protests, poverty, inequality, social change
and slow economic progress are part of everyday life. At the cen- ter of it all
is president Evo Morales and his new constitution, reforms, and policies that
have marked the nation’s revolutionary movement toward socialism. All of
these political and social changes are now coming together to create what
will certainly be one of the most interesting chapters in Bolivian history.
Economy
The nationalization of energy and mining interests was applauded by
Bolivia’s poor, but it has soured relations with foreign investors and some
foreign governments. And despite sky-high commodity prices, the Bolivian
economy hasn’t grown as fast as it should have. The export of raw materials
remains the nation’s bread and butter, and with the world’s largest lithium
deposits, plenty of natural gas and minerals, Bolivia could very well
continue to see moderate economic progress for the foreseeable future. The
stumbling blocks will include environmental conditions (deforestation,
desertification and climate change), depressed foreign markets, and the
reluctance of foreign companies to invest money and expertise in a country
with a growing track record of nationalizations.
Society
»Population: 10 million
»People living on less than US$2 per
day: 2.5 million
»People below national poverty line: 5.1
million
»GDP per person: US$4100
»Gini Inequality Index: 58.2 (8th most
un- equal in the world)
»Inflation: 6.9 %
»Literacy: 86.7%
»Fertility rate: 2.93
»Infant mortality rate: 4.094/1000 live
births
Despite modest economic growth, more than half of the population still lives
in poverty, and the social programs outlined in the new constitution have
made only minimal progress toward remedying poverty traps.
The new measures have succeeded,
however, in reframing Bolivia’s social
structure. Despite practically no escape
from poverty, there seems to be a spark of
self-awareness and hope that’s never been
more evident among the nation’s
indigenous majority. And indigenous
people today, especially highlands
groups, are playing a significant role in
politics and policy. The role of women is
also slowly evolving, as they step out of
their traditional roles as mothers, wives
and heads of private households,
emerging as businesspeople and
community leaders.
Politics
Conflict is on the rise. There are around 1000 standing conflicts across the
nation over high food and energy prices, the use of natural resources,
education, social inclusion, environmental degradation and more. People
protest against poor working conditions, mining operations that contaminate
rivers, and roads that displace communities and affect ecosystems. For
example, a proposed Brazilian-financed road through the Amazon brought
about major national protests in 2012 and was later rejected by Morales.
Protests regularly shut down Bolivia’s roads and are having a detrimental
effect on the economy. Violence stemming from the ever-evolving drug trade
is also building throughout the region.
Moves to redistribute land and wealth have met with strong opposition
from Bolivia’s resource-rich eastern region, where autonomy movements are
ongoing. Despite this opposition and growing discontent over what many
perceive as weak rule of law and widespread corruption, others still expect
the numerous social entitlement programs sponsored by the government and
Bolivia is the world’s second or third
biggest cocaine producer – up to 290
tons of the white stuff are produced here
each year. Between 24,000 and 30,000
hectares of coca are cultivated nationally
(legal production is capped at 12,000
hectares).
funded with the growing income from mining, agriculture and gas exports to
keep Morales’ revolution moving forward.
Internationally, the Bolivian
government is engaged in a political twostep that tries to balance foreign
investment with national interests. At the
heart of this is the desire to keep the
wealth from Bolivia’s natural resources in
Bolivia.
DOS & DON’TS
Kissing Greet members of the opposite sex with a kiss on one cheek in the
north, both cheeks in the south. An empty-grip handshake followed by a
distant two-arm embrace and another hand-grab are standard with Quechua
and Aymará people.
Stealing Pictures If you can’t touch your subject and haven’t talked to them,
you may be guilty of image theft.
Greetings Greet people with Buenos días, Buenas tardes and Buenas
noches.
Politics Do express your views.
TOP ARTISTS
Kalamarka Contemporary Andean music at its best.
Mamani Mamani Aymará art made for the 21st century.
Los Kjarkas A top folk act featuring traditional Bolivian instruments.
Marina Nuñez del Prado The legacy of Bolivia’s beloved sculptor lives on.
Ukamau y Ké El Alto’s hip-hop act is outrageous and intense.
TOP FILMS
The Devil’s Miner (2005) Documentary on a young boy working in Potosí’s
silver mine.
Cocalero (2007) Documentary on Morales’ run for the presidency.
Amargo Mar (Bitter Sea; 1984) A look at the loss of Bolivia’s coastline to
Chile.
TOP BOOKS
Fat Man from La Paz: Contemporary Fiction from Bolivia (2003,
Santos) Modern fiction.
Whispering in the Giant’s Ear: A Frontline Chronicle from Bolivia’s
War on Globalization (2006, Powers) A look at battles over natural
resources.
Top of section
History
Bolivia’s history is evident in every corner of daily life – in the country’s
pre-Hispanic ruins, colonial-era churches and in the museums, galleries and
chaotic markets of the city centers. The cultural imprint that dates back
more than 6000 years is seen in the language, dress, customs and traditions
of indigenous peoples, and in the unique dual society that sorts Spanish
descendants, recent immigrants and indigenous peoples into difficult-toescape archetypes: a dominant paradigm that is only now being challenged
with the rise of the country’s first self-declared indigenous president.
From a purely economic standpoint, Bolivia is a country that never
should have been. The country has vast natural resources but a small, sparse
population, meaning that it primarily produces raw goods but lacks the
industry required to turn these into more valuable products. Politic- ally it
has been pushed and pulled and bent out of shape by the stronger forces
centering in Cuzco, Madrid, Lima, Buenos Aires and Washington. And
while much of Bolivia’s history follows the macro-trends of the rest of
South America, the country’s spirit, character and context have come
together to form a complex and intricate story unique unto itself.
Top
Historic
Attractions
»Tiwanaku
»Iskanwaya
»Isla del Sol
»chullpa tombs
»Potosí
»Sucre
»Che Trail
»Choro trek
»Samaipata
»Jesuit Missions Circuit
PREHISTORY
The great Altiplano (which literally means ‘high plateau’), the largest
expanse of arable land in the Andes, extends from present-day Bolivia into
southern Peru, northwestern Argentina and northern Chile.
Cultural interchanges between the early Andean
peoples occurred mostly through trade, usually
between nomadic tribes in the lowlands, farmers in
the Yungas, organized societies such as the Tiwanaku
and Inca in the high plateau, and coastal traders in
present-day Peru and Chile. These interchanges and
geographic advantages around the Altiplano resulted
in food surpluses and eventually led to the Andes’
emergence as the cradle of South America’s highest
cultural achievements.
Advanced civilizations first developed along the
Peruvian coast and in the valleys in the early AD
period. Highland civilizations developed a little later.
Some archaeologists define the prehistory of the
Central Andes in terms of ‘horizons’ – Early, Middle
and Late – each of which was characterized by
distinct architectural and artistic trends.
The Inca spoke Runasimi (later called
Quechua by the conquistadors). They
lacked a writing system but did have
advanced math systems, keeping track of
accounts – and perhaps other information
– with knotted collections of cords
known as quipus.
EARLY & MIDDLE HORIZONS
The so-called Early Horizon (1400–400 BC) was an era of architectural
activity and innovation, most evident in the ruins of Chavín de Huantar, on
the eastern slopes of the Andes in Peru. Chavín influences resounded far
and wide, even after the decline of Chavín society, and spilled over into the
Early Middle Horizon (400 BC–AD 500).
By 700 BC, Tiwanaku had developed into a thriving civilization. A
highly advanced culture for the Andes, it had an extensive system of roads,
irrigation canals and agricultural terraces. This system is believed to have
supported a population of thousands of people in the 83-sq-km Tiwanaku
Valley.
The Middle Horizon (AD 500–900)
was marked by the imperial expansion of
the Tiwanaku and Huari (of the
Ayacucho Valley of present-day Peru)
cultures. The Tiwanakans produced
technically advanced work, most notably
the city itself. They created impressive
ceramics, gilded ornamentation,
engraved pillars and slabs with calendar
markings, and designs representing their bearded white leader and deity,
Viracocha.
Tiwanaku was inhabited from 1500 BC until AD 1200, but its power in
the region – based more on religious than economic factors – was strongest
from AD 600 to around AD 900, when the civilization began the mysterious
decline that lasted until the 1200s. One speculation is that Tiwanaku was
uprooted by a drop in Lake Titicaca’s water level, that left the lakeside
settlement far from shore. Another theory postulates that it was attacked
and its population massacred by the warlike Kollas (also known as the
Aymará) from the west. When the Spanish arrived, they were told an Inca
legend about a battle between the Kollas and ‘bearded white men’ on an
island in Lake Titicaca. These men were presumably Tiwanakans, only a
few of whom were able to escape. Some researchers believe that the
displaced survivors migrated southward and developed into the Chipaya
people of the western Oruro department.

DISEASES
Smallpox and other European diseases
killed off up to 90% of the indigenous
population in some areas. These
epidemics continued on 20-year cycles
well into the 17th century.
LATE HORIZON – THE INCA
The period between 900 and 1475 is known as the Late Intermediate
Horizon. After the fall of Tiwanaku, regionalized city-states such as Chan
Chan in Peru and the Aymará kingdoms around the southern shores of Lake
Titicaca came to power. However, it was the rise and fall of the Inca empire
that would truly define the pre-Columbian period.
The Inca inhabited the Cuzco region (in present-day Peru) from the 12th
century. They were renowned for their great stone cities and their skill in
working with gold and silver. The Inca set up a social welfare scheme,
taxed up to two-thirds of produce and worked in a system primarily based
on the communal ownership of property. Through the mita system (where
short-term forced labor was used to build public projects) they were able to
create a complex road network and communication system that defied the
difficult terrain of their far-flung empire.
Around 1440 the Inca started to expand their political boundaries. The
eighth Inca king, Viracocha (not to be confused with the Tiwanaku deity of
the same name), believed the mandate from their sun god was not just to
conquer, plunder and enslave, but to organize defeated tribes and absorb
them into the realm of the benevolent sun god.
Between 1476 and 1534 the Inca
civilization managed to extend its
influence over the Aymará kingdoms
around Lake Titicaca. They pushed their
empire from its seat of power in Cuzco
eastward into present-day Bolivia,
southward to the northern reaches of
modern Argentina and Chile, and
northward through present-day Ecuador
and southern Colombia.
The people of the Aymará kingdoms were permitted to keep their
language and social traditions, and never truly accepted Inca rule. Today
you can still see these linguistic and cultural splits in the Quechua, Aymará
and myriad other indigenous groups of Bolivia.
By the late 1520s internal rivalries began to take their toll on the empire
with the sons of Inca Huayna Capac – Atahualpa and Huáscar – fighting a
bloody civil war after the death of their father. Atahualpa (who controlled
the northern reaches of the empire) won the war. While he was traveling
south to Cuzco to claim his throne, he ran into the conquistador Francisco
Pizarro, who captured, ransomed and eventually beheaded him. This left a
power vacuum, making it easy for the Spanish to conquer the lands and
peoples of the Inca empire.
About 8 million people have died in the
Potosí mine over the years. You can still
visit the mine today, or go on other
interesting mine tours near Oruro.
SPANISH CONQUEST
The Spanish conquest of South America was remarkably quick. The chaos
left by the Inca civil war helped, as did the epidemics caused by European
diseases. European mastery of metallurgy for war also played its part, and
so did their horses (what strange beasts they must have seemed to the Inca
people) and the myth that bearded men would some day be sent by the great
Viracocha.
Within a year of their arrival in Ecuador in 1531, Francisco Pizarro,
Diego de Almagro and their bands of conquistadors arrived in Cuzco.
Alto Perú (the area we now know as
Bolivia) was aligned with the defeated
Huáscar during the Inca civil war,
making its conquest rather easy for
Diego de Almagro. He was assassinated
in 1538, then three years later Pizarro
suffered the same fate at the hands of
mutinous subordinates. But this didn’t deter the Spanish, who kept
exploring and settling their newly conquered land.
During these initial stages of conquest, infighting between Spanish
factions was common and the fate of Bolivia – a political backwater until
the discovery of silver – was tied to the interests of the more powerful
political centers in Cuzco and Lima.
CONQUISTADORS – BRAVE EXPLORERS
OR SOCIAL CLIMBERS?
It’s important to note the circumstances that brought the conquistadors to the Americas. Most
were not part of the landed Spanish elite, rather they were wealthy enough to make the crossing
to the New World but lacked any prospects of upward mobility in Europe…the kind of person
that has nothing to lose and everything to gain. Ironically, the riches they found in the Americas
would never win the conquistadors (or early American settlers) a place in European society.
This no-exit scenario led to the formation of local class structures and governments, the
intermixing of languages and cultures, and eventually the independence movements.
Between 1780 and 1782 an indigenous
revolt led by Tupac Amaru extended
from Peru into Bolivia. During this time,
the indigenous nobility lost much of their
power, creating the framework for
complete domination by Spanishdescendent interests.
The Legacy of Potosí
By the time Diego Huallpa revealed his earth-shattering discovery of silver
at Cerro Rico in Potosí in 1544, Spanish conquerors had already firmly
implanted their customs on the remnants of the Inca empire. Taking a page
from the Inca book, they left the local cacique (chieftain) leadership and
mita structure in place within the indigenous communities. This provided a
local system of governance and an ongoing labor supply. The best
conquistadors were granted encomiendas, vast swaths of land and the
peasant labor that went with it.
Potosí was officially founded in 1545,
and in 1558 Alto Perú gained its
autonomy from Lima with the placement
of an Audiencia (Royal Court) in
present-day Sucre. Transportation hubs,
farming communities and other support
centers sprung up, centered on Potosí.
And while some other Bolivian cities
such as La Paz and Sucre were coming
to life, the focus in the region was on Potosí. Potosí’s mine was the most
prolific in the world and its silver underwrote Spain’s international
ambitions, enabling the country to conduct the counterreformation in
Europe, and supporting the extravagance of its monarchy for at least two
centuries. But not all wealth left the region, and cathedrals sprung up across
the Altiplano, eventually giving rise to a local school of design, and later
the establishment of Bolivia’s place in the fields of arts, politics and
literature.
Missionaries showed up in the 18th and 19th centuries in the areas
around Santa Cruz and Tarija, altering the cultural landscape of the region.
Increased conflict between new Spanish arrivals and the elite of Potosí in
the late 17th century triggered a broad economic decline in the 18th century.
In 1865 General Mariano Melgarejo
drunkenly set his army off on an
overland march to aid France at the
outset of the Franco-Prussian War. A
sudden downpour sobered him up.
INDEPENDENCE
The early part of the 19th century was a time of revolution and
independence in Bolivia. Harvest failures and epidemics severely affected
the Bolivian economy between 1803 and 1805, creating fertile ground for
revolution. To top it off, with the French Revolution, Napoleon’s wars in
Europe and British support for Latin America’s independence movements,
the colonists of the Americas were finally able to perceive what a world
without royalty would look like.
By May 1809, Latin America’s first
independence movement had gained
momentum and was well underway in
Chuquisaca (later renamed Sucre), with
other cities quick to follow suit. This
first revolutionary spark was quickly put
down. Ironically, while the first shouts of
revolution came from Bolivia, it would
be the last country in South America to gain independence.
Here’s how it played out. By the early 1820s General Simón Bolívar had
succeeded in liberating both Venezuela and Colombia from Spanish
domination. In 1822 he dispatched Mariscal (Field Marshall) Antonio José
de Sucre to Ecuador to defeat the royalists at the battle of Pichincha. In
1824, after years of guerrilla action against the Spanish and the victories of
Bolívar and Sucre in the battles of Junín (August 6) and Ayacucho
(December 9), Peru won its independence. During this time, another
independence leader coming from the Río de la Plata, José de San Martín,
was busy fighting battles in eastern Bolivia and liberating much of the
southern corner of the continent.
With both Argentina and Peru eyeing the prize of the Potosí mines, Sucre
incited a declaration of independence from Peru and, in 1825, the Republic
of Bolivia was born. Bolívar (yes, the country was named after him) and
Sucre served as Bolivia’s first and second presidents but, after a brief
attempt by the third president Andrés Santa Cruz to form a confederation
with Peru, things began to go awry. Chilean opposition eventually broke up
this potentially powerful alliance, and Bolivia was relegated to a more
secondary role in regional affairs with a period of caudillo rule dominating
the national politics until the 1880s. Thereafter Bolivia was ruled by a
civilian oligarchy divided into liberal and conservative groups until the
1930s, when the traditional political system again fell apart, leading to
constant military intervention until the 1952 Revolution.
SHRINKING TERRITORY
At the time of independence Bolivia’s boundaries encompassed well over 2 million sq km. But
its neighbors soon moved to acquire its territory, removing coastal access and much of the area
covered by its ancient Amazonian rubber trees.
The coastal loss occurred during the War of the Pacific, fought against Chile between 1879
and 1884. Many Bolivians believe that Chile stole the Atacama Desert’s copper- and nitrate-rich
sands and 850km of coastline from Peru and Bolivia by invading during Carnaval. Chile did
attempt to compensate for the loss by building a railroad from La Paz to the ocean and allowing
Bolivia free port privileges in Antofagasta, but Bolivians have never forgotten this devastating
enclaustramiento (landlocked status).
The next major loss was in 1903 during the rubber boom when Brazil hacked away at
Bolivia’s inland expanse. Both Brazil and Bolivia had been ransacking the forests of the Acre
territory – it was so rich in rubber trees that Brazil engineered a dispute over sovereignty and
sent in its army. Brazil then convinced the Acre region to secede from the Bolivian republic and
promptly annexed it.
There were two separate territory losses to Argentina. First, Argentina annexed a large slice of
the Chaco in 1862. Then, in 1883, the territory of Puna de Atacama also went to Argentina. It
had been offered to both Chile and Argentina, the former in exchange for the return of the
coastal areas, the latter in exchange for clarification over Bolivia’s ownership of Tarija.
After losing the War of the Pacific, Bolivia was desperate to have the Chaco, an inhospitable
region beneath which rich oil fields were mooted to lie, as an outlet to the Atlantic via the Río
Paraguay. Between 1932 and 1935, a particularly brutal war was waged between Bolivia and
Paraguay over the disputed territory (more than 80,000 lives were lost). Though no decisive
victory was reached, both nations had grown weary of fighting, and peace negotiations in 1938
awarded most of the disputed territory to Paraguay.
To encourage the settlement of the
Amazon, Paz Estenssoro promoted road
building (with Japanese aid) in the
wilderness and opened up vast
indigenous lands and pristine rainforest
to logging interests.
POLITICAL & ECONOMIC STRIFE
During the 20th century wealthy tin barons and landowners controlled
Bolivian farming and mining interests, while the peasantry was rele- gated
to pongueaje, a feudal system of peonage. Civil unrest brewed, with the
most significant development being the emergence of the Movi- miento
Nacionalista Revolucionario (MNR) political party. It united the masses
behind the common cause of popular reform, sparking friction between
peasant miners and absentee tin bosses. Under the leadership of Víctor Paz
Estenssoro, the MNR prevailed in the 1951 elections, but a last-minute
military coup prevented it from actually taking power. What ensued was a
period of serious combat, which ended with the defeat of the military and
Paz Estensorro’s rise to power in what has been called the National
Revolution of 1952. He immediately nationalized the mines, evicted the tin
barons, put an end to pongueaje and set up Comibol (Corporación Minera
de Bolivia), the state entity in charge of mining interests. The MNR
remained in power for 12 years but even with US support it was unable to
raise the standard of living or increase food production substantially.
The ’60s and ’70s were decades of
military coups, dictators, brutal regimes
of torture, arrests and disappearances, as
well as a marked increase in cocaine
production and trafficking.
In 1982 Congress elected Hernán Siles
Zuazo, the civilian left-wing leader of
the Communist-supported Movimiento
de la Izquierda Revo- lucionaria (MIR), which began one of the longest
democratic periods in Bolivian history to date. His term was beleaguered by
labor disputes, government overspending and huge monetary devaluation,
resulting in a truly staggering inflation rate that at one point reached
35,000% annually.
When Siles Zuazo gave up after three years and called general elections,
Paz Estenssoro returned to politics to become president for the fourth time.
He immediately enacted harsh measures to revive the shattered economy
including ousting labor unions, imposing a wage freeze and eliminating
price subsidies, then deployed armed forces to keep the peace. Inflation was
curtailed within weeks, but spiraling unemployment threatened the
government’s stability.
Want to know more about Bolivia’s
history, taking into account the effects of
geography, economy, policy and more?
Check out the dense but incisive A
Concise History of Bolivia (2011) by
Herbert S Klein.
COCA
About 1.2 million kilos of coca leaf are
consumed monthly in Bolivia, leading
Evo Morales to declare it an intrinsic part
of Bolivia’s heri- tage in the new
constitution. Millions have been invested
in alternative uses for coca.
ECONOMIC REFORMS
OVERSHADOWED
The early ’90s were characterized by political apathy, party politics, and the
struggle between capitalización (the opening of state companies to
international investment) and populist models. The free market won with
the election of Gonzalo ‘Goni’ Sánchez de Lozada, the MNR leader who
had played a key role in the curtailing of inflation through ‘shock therapy’
during the Estenssoro government.
Economic reforms saw state-owned
companies and mining interests open up
to overseas investment in the hope that
that privatization would bring stability
and make the enterprises profitable.
Overseas investors were offered 49%
equity, total voting control, license to
operate in Bolivia and up to 49% of the
profits. The remaining 51% of the shares were distributed to Bolivians as
pensions and through Participación Popular, a program meant to channel
spending away from the cities and into rural schools, clinics and other local
infrastructure.
In late 1995 reform issues were overshadowed by violence and unrest
surrounding US-directed coca eradication in the Chapare. In the late ’90s
the government faced swelling public discontent with the coca eradication
measures and protests in response to increasing gas prices, a serious water
shortage and economic downturn in the department of Cochabamba.
Following a successful campaign
advised by a team of US political
consultants that he hired, Goni was again
appointed president in August 2002. The
following year his economic policies
were met with widespread
demonstrations which resulted in the loss
of 67 lives during a police lockdown in
La Paz. In October 2003, Goni resigned
amid massive popular protests and fled
to the US. He currently faces charges related to the deaths during the
demonstrations, both in the US and Bolivia, and a formal extradition
process is underway.
Protests, rising fuel prices and continued unrest pushed Goni’s successor,
Carlos Mesa, to resign in 2005.
THE MORALES ERA
In December 2005 Bolivians elected their country’s first indigenous
president. A former cocalero (coca grower) and representative from
Cochabamba, Evo Morales of Movimiento al Socialismo (MAS) won nearly
54% of the vote, having promised to alter the traditional political class and
to empower the nation’s poor (mainly indigenous) majority. After the
election, Morales quickly grabbed the lefty spotlight, touring the world and
meeting with Venezuela’s Hugo Chávez, Cuba’s Fidel Castro, Brazil’s Luis
Inácio Lula da Silva and members of South Africa’s African National
Congress. Symbolically, on May Day 2006, he nationalized Bolivia’s
natural gas reserves and raised taxes on energy investors in a move that
would consolidate Bolivia’s resources in Bolivian hands. Nationalizations
continue to this day.
In July 2006, Morales formed a National Constituent Assembly to set
about rewriting the country’s constitution. In January 2009, the new socially
focused constitution was approved by 67% of the voters in a nationwide
referendum. The first constitution in Bolivia approved by popular vote, it
gave greater power to the country’s indigenous majority and allowed
Morales to seek a second five-year term, which he won that same year. The
constitution also limited the size of landholdings in order to redistribute
Bolivia’s land from large ranchers and landowners to poor indigenous
farmers.
While Evo Morales has near-universal support among the indigenous
people of Bolivia, his radical social changes aren’t without resistance. In the
eastern part of the country – the four departments known as La Media Luna
(Half Moon, after their geographic shape) – where much of the natural
resources lie, a strong right-wing opposition has been challenging Morales,
accusing him of being an ethnocentric despot.
The polarization in Bolivia is very real, with the province of Santa Cruz
constantly requesting more autonomy and threatening to secede from the
western highlands. However, Morales has been surprisingly successful in
pushing his initiatives through, despite the fervent opposition (following the
September 2008 protests, he expelled the US ambassador, Philip S
Goldberg, reproaching him for fuelling the right-wing separatists). And it’s
not just opposition from the east: Morales has seriously alienated
businesspeople and industrialists throughout the nation, not to mention
international investors, causing the country to become even more fractured
along economic, cultural and racial lines. It seems the dual society in one of
South America’s poorest nations will last a while longer.
TIMELINE
4000 BC
The first settlers arrive and begin to domesticate crops and animals,
adapting slowly to high-altitude living in the Altiplano. The tough
conditions influence a sparse population distribution.
3200–800 BC
First traces of pottery shards in the Altiplano date from around 3200 BC,
indicating the formation of more structured societies. On the Peruvian
coast the Chavín culture rises.
AD 500–900
There’s a food surplus, and the ceremonial center of Tiwanaku, on the
shores of Lake Titicaca, flourishes, developing into the religious and
political capital of the Altiplano.
1000–1200
Tiwanaku’s power wanes, the population disperses and the ceremonial
site is largely abandoned due to unknown reasons – possibly climate
change (drought), an earthquake or a foreign invasion.
1440s
The Inca, based in Cuzco, extend their political boundaries by pushing
eastward into Kollasuyo (present-day Bolivia) and imposing tax- ation,
religion and the Quechua language on local tribes.
1520s
Internal rivalries herald the beginning of the end for the Inca empire, a
political force for less than a century. In a brief civil war, Atahualpa
defeats his half-brother, Huáscar, and assumes the emperor’s throne.
1531
The Spanish, led by conquistador Francisco Pizarro, arrive in Ecuador.
After a quick-won fight with the Inca, they claim Alto Perú, which would
later become Bolivia.
1544
The wandering Indian Diego Huallpa discovers silver in Potosí’s Cerro
Rico (Rich Mountain), which leads to the development of the world’s
most prolific silver mine.
1545
Potosí is founded as a mining town. Due to the incredible wealth, it grows
rapidly and gains a mint, 86 churches and a population approaching
200,000 by 1672.
1780
Tupac Amaru’s revolt kicks off in Peru, extending later into Bolivia. The
revolt is put down, and effectively dismantles the cacique (chieftain)
structure of local indigenous government.
1809
Bolivia proclaims its independence from Spain by establishing the first
juntas (autonomist governments); first in Chuquisaca (later renamed
Sucre), then in La Paz.
1822
General Simón Bolívar succeeds in liberating Venezuela, Ecuador,
Colombia and Panama from Spanish rule. He is made president of a
short-lived new nation, Gran Colombia (1819–31).
1825
General Sucre incites a declaration of independence for Alto Perú, and
the new Republic of Bolivia is born, loosely modeled on the US, with
legislative, executive and judicial branches of government.
1879–84
Bolivia loses its coastline to Chile in the War of the Pacific. The loss of
this transit point continues to hobble the Bolivian economy to this day.
1903
During the rubber boom, Brazil annexes the remote Acre area, which
stretched from Bolivia’s present Amazonian borders to halfway up Peru’s
eastern border.
1932
Bolivia enters the Chaco War against Paraguay over a border dispute for
control of the potentially huge deposits of oil eyed by rival foreign oil
companies.
1935–38
A ceasefire in the Chaco War is negotiated in 1935, at which time
Paraguay controls much of the region. A 1938 truce awards Paraguay
three-quarters of the Chaco.
1942
Hundreds of trade-union laborers are shot down by government troops at
a Catavi tin-mining complex while striking for better wages and
conditions. The fight for labor rights is on.
1952
A military coup provokes a popular armed revolt by the miners, known as
the April Revolution. After heavy fighting the military is defeated and
Víctor Paz Estenssoro takes power.
1964
After trying and failing for 12 years to raise the standard of living, the
MNR’s popularity wanes, and Víctor Paz Estenssoro’s government is
finally forced out by a military junta.
1967
Argentine revolutionary Ernesto ‘Che’ Guevara, having failed to foment a
peasant revolt in Bolivia, is exe- cuted by a US-backed military squad in
the hamlet of La Higuera.
1975
Operation Condor, a clandestine program to subvert commun- ist
movements and support right-wing governments in South America, gets
its blackwater beginnings. Some attribute 60,000 deaths to Condor.
1978
After a decade of reported human rights abuses, Hugo Banzer Suárez
schedules general elections and loses. He ignores the results, but is
eventually forced to step down by a coup.
1982
The Bolivian Congress appoints a woman, Lidia Gueilar, as interim
president during a tumultuous period of several presidential elections and
coups. The rule of Bolivia’s first woman president is brief.
1985
Paz Estenssoro’s New Economic Policy promotes spending cuts and
privatization, resulting in strikes and protests by the miners’ union;
massive unemployment follows the crash of the price of tin.
1987
The US begins sending Drug Enforcement Administration anti-coca
squadrons into the Beni and Chapare regions, where coca has generated
substantial income for the growers and traffickers.
1989
With no candidate winning a majority in the presidential election, the
National Congress is left to select Jaime Paz Zamora of the MIR as the
73rd president of Bolivia.
1993
Gonzalo ‘Goni’ Sánchez is elected president on a center-left freemarketeering ticket and, with his government, proceeds to introduce
landmark social, economic and constitutional reforms.
2002–03
Goni wins the presidency with only 22.5% of the vote. After massive
protests against his unpopular economic policies lead to more than 60
deaths, he resigns in October 2003.
2005
After a string of more than 70 presidents throughout its tumultuous
history, Bolivia elects the country’s first indigenous leader, Evo Morales,
who wins with nearly 54% of the vote.
2008
Right-wing factions’ opposition to Morales’ renationalization of Bolivia’s
gas wealth culminates in pitched street battles in Santa Cruz that leave 11
dead and more than 50 wounded.
2009
The new constitution is approved with more than 60% support, giving
greater rights to the majority indigenous population and allowing Morales
to run for – and win – his second term.
Top of section
AYMARÁ
The Wiphala flag (square-shaped and
consisting of 49 small squares in a grid
with graduating colors of the rainbow)
has been adopted as a symbol of the
Aymará people. Whether the colors used
originate from Inca times or more
recently, is cause for debate.
Life in Bolivia
THE NATIONAL PSYCHE
Bolivia is a remarkably stratified society. While the hierarchies defined over
500 years of rule by Spanish descendants are slowly starting to fade, your
place in society and the opportunities you will have throughout life are still
largely defined by the color of your skin, the language you speak, the
clothes you wear and the money you have.
Attitude depends on climate and altitude. Cambas (lowlanders) and
kollas (highlanders) enjoy expounding on what makes them different (ie
better) than the other. Lowlanders are said to be warmer, more casual and
more generous to strangers; highlanders are supposedly harder working but
less open-minded. While the jesting used to be good- natured, regional
tensions have increased over the past few years, with Santa Cruz’ threats of
secession constantly in the news.
Thanks in part to Evo Morales, many
Bolivians have been redefining and even
questioning what it means to be
Bolivian. From the beginning, Evo
Morales vigorously stressed that
Bolivian identity was based on an
individual’s ethnic origins. Despite his
claims that all Bolivians are equal,
Morales has been quick to espouse the
status of indigenous groups. Some
accuse him of political maneuvering and
of further polarizing the country according to race, class and economic
status. He has been seen as favoring indigenous groups over others,
including mestizos who, as des- cendants of the Spanish colonists and
indigenous people, are also proud of their Bolivian status.
And while the political power is shifting toward the indigenous majority,
the money stays in the hands of the ruling elite (at least in the hands of
those who have not left since Evo Morales took power).
Not many Bolivians are especially proud of their nation, and talking with
people from all walks of life you can’t help but get a sense of poor selfesteem and fatalism. And while many could attribute this to poverty, not
many ‘poor’ Bolivians consider themselves poor. For example, in the
Altiplano, many ‘poor’ llama herders have up to 80 head of llama (worth
about US$8000). Wealth is found in lasting assets such as land and family,
connection with the earth and health.
Life’s not easy – it’s actually really tough for most Bolivians – so many
try to take joy from the little things: soccer, the rising of the sun, good rains
and harvests, birthdays, religious festivals, coca, cerveza (beer), births and
christenings.
ARE YOU LOST, MY FRIEND?
Rather than give no response at all, some Bolivians will provide you with incorrect answers or
directions. They’re not being malicious; they merely want to appear helpful and knowledgeable.
It’s also worth remembering that street numbers are hardly used – people give directions by
landmarks instead. Sometimes it’s best to ask several people the same question – the most
common response is likely to be correct.
Despite the high prevalence of llama
fetuses in the markets (used for
sacrificial offerings), llamas are not
killed especially for them. About 3000
llamas are slaughtered daily on the
Altiplano for wool and meat; the fetuses
are removed from those animals
subsequently found to be pregnant.
LIFESTYLE
Day-to-day life varies from Bolivian to Bolivian, mostly depending on
whether they live in the city or in the country and whether they are rich or
poor. Many campesinos (subsistence farmers) live without running water,
heat or electricity, and some wear clothing that has hardly changed in style
since the Spanish arrived. But in the Bolivian cities, especially Santa Cruz
(the country’s richest city), La Paz, Cochabamba and Sucre, thousands of
people enjoy the comforts of contemporary conveniences and live very
modern lifestyles.
Life in this fiercely self-reliant nation begins with the family. No matter
what tribe or class one comes from, it’s likely that they have close ties to
their extended family. In the highlands, the concept of ayllu (the traditional
peasant system of communal land ownership, management and decision
making) that dates back to the Inca times is still important today.
For many in Bolivia’s lower class, the
day is about making enough money to
eat, attending church, doing chores, the
children studying, and a bit of laughter
and forgetting. For the richer city class,
there are distractions that come from
economic surplus such as theater,
cuisine, the arts, and the ever-important
country club. In these circles, the last
name still defines where a person can get
to. Young people are increasingly flaunting these rules, but it is still
relatively rare to see intermarriage between people from disparate ethnic
groups or economic classes.
Homosexuality is legal in Bolivia but isn’t openly displayed in this
society of machismo. Despite a growing number of gay bars in some larger
cities, gay culture remains fairly subtle.
RELIGION
Roughly 95% of Bolivia’s population professes Roman Catholicism and
practices it to varying degrees. The remaining 5% are Protestant, agnostic
or belonging to other religions. Strong evangelical movements are rapidly
gaining followers with their fire-and-brimstone messages of the world’s
imminent end. Despite the political and economic strength of Christianity,
it’s clear that most religious activities have incorporated some Inca and
Aymará belief systems. Doctrines, rites and superstitions are commonplace,
and some campesinos still live by a traditional lunar calendar.
SPORTS
Like for many of its Latin American neighbors, Bolivia’s national sport is
fútbol (soccer). La Paz’ Bolívar and The Strongest usually participate
(albeit weakly) in the Copa Libertadores, the annual showdown of Latin
America’s top clubs. Professional fútbol matches are held every weekend in
big cities, and impromptu street games are always happening. While small
towns lack many basic services, you can be sure to find a well-tended
cancha (soccer field) almost everywhere you go – and you’ll be welcome to
join in. Some communities still bar women from the field, but women’s
teams have started popping up in the Altiplano, where they play clad in
polleras (skirts) and jerseys.
In rural communities, volleyball is a sunset affair, with mostly adults
playing a couple of times a week. Racquetball, billiards, chess and cacho
(dice) are also popular. The unofficial national sport, however, has to be
feasting and feting – the competition between dancers and drinkers knows
no bounds.
Top of section
Indigenous Culture
Bolivia is a multiethnic society with a remarkable diversity of linguistic,
cultural and artistic traditions. In fact, the country has the largest population
of indigenous peoples in South America, with most sociologists and
anthropologists agreeing that more than 60% of the population is of
indigenous descent.
Bolivia has 36 identified indigenous groups. The vast majority of those
who identify themselves as indigenous are Aymará (about 25%) and
Quechua (about 30%), many of whom are located in the highlands. The
remaining groups (including Guaraní and Chiquitano) are located almost
entirely in the lowlands.
Mestizos (people of mixed indigenous and Spanish blood) make up a
substantial portion of the population. Mestizos sometimes fall into
mainstream society, while others retain their roots within the indigenous
societal makeup.
The Aymará and Quechua spiritual
worlds embrace three levels: Alajpacha
(the world above or eternal sky,
representing light and life); Akapacha
(located between the sky and hell, and
between life and death); and
Mankapacha (located below, symbolizing
death and obscurity).
POLITICAL & SOCIAL CHANGE
Until recently Bolivia’s indigenous groups have lacked a significant political voice, though they make up the majority of the nation’s poor. With the
election of Evo Morales, and a new constitution that grants expanded rights
to indigenous groups and establishes Bolivia as a plurinational and secular
state, the role of indigenous peoples in the nation’s economy and policy is
rapidly evolving. Nowadays there are numerous high-level indigenous
ministers and technocrats, many of whom came from humble beginnings.
This new awareness is creating a growing sense of pride within indigenous
communities, where centuries-old traditions of terrace farming, respect for
the land and communal decision making still play a strong role in everyday
life, as do satellite TVs, cell phones, trucks, new rural schools, westernized
dress and changing artistic, musical and political attitudes.
For centuries, women of indigenous
descent who lived in the cities were
known as cholas. Today, many consider
this term to be derogatory, and some
now go with the politically correct
mestiza moniker. The only problem is
that mestizo/a also describes people of
mixed Spanish and indigenous descent.
Indígenas is a commonly accepted term
for indi- genous peoples, as are the
simpler and more effective gente (people), persona (person), ser humano
(human being).
Visitors to indigenous communities, especially in the Altiplano where
communities are particularly wary of outsiders, may be turned off by the
aloofness and insular nature of these people. But keep in mind that Bolivia
has lived under a highly structured, hierarchical societal framework since
the rise of Tiwanaku and that your visit is but a distraction from the daily
chores of survival. Many indigenous communities are slowly embracing
tourism and a stay in places such as Curahuara de Carangas can provide a
unique introduction to these communities.
BOLIVIA’S INDIGENOUS GROUPS
It’s impossible to capture the remarkable linguistic, artistic and spiritual traditions of Bolivia’s
myriad ethnic groups in just a few words, but here’s an overview.
Highlands
»Aymará The Aymará culture emerged on the southern shores of Lake
Titicaca after the fall of Tiwanaku. These strong, warlike people lived in
city-states and dominated the areas around the lake. Today, Aymará live
in the areas surrounding the lake and in the Yungas, with La Paz’ El
Alto area being the capital of Aymará culture. They speak – you
guessed it – Aymará.
»Chipaya Perhaps the direct descendants of the Tiwanaku.
»Kallawaya A remote tribe with a dying language.
»Quechua Descended from the Inca, some 9 to 14 million Quechua
speakers live in Bolivia, Peru, Ecuador, Chile, Colombia and Argentina
today. These people lived across the former Inca empire. With the
decline of mining in the 1980s, many Quechua speakers moved to the
Chapare to harvest coca.
Lowlands
»Chiquitano Living primarily in the Chiquitania tropical savanna
outside Santa Cruz, but also in Beni and in Brazil, there are about
180,000 Chiquitanos in Bolivia and about a quarter of them speak
Chiquitano. Before the arrival of the Jesuits in the region there were
numerous disparate ethnic groups. During the evangelization they were
forced to live in small townships where a common language and dress
were adopted.
»Guaraní This tribe shares a common language and lives in Paraguay,
Brazil and parts of Uruguay and Bolivia. You can learn about their
culture at the Guaraní Museum in Santa Cruz.
»Mojeño This significant ethnic group from the Beni department was
quite large before the 17th century, with more than 350,000 people.
Many were killed off by European diseases, but the language and
culture survives today. Many early European explorers believed El
Dorado would be found in Mojeño territory.
RELIGIOUS LIFE
Based on animism, indigenous religions revolve around natural gods and
spirits that date back to Inca times and earlier. Pachamama, the ubiquitous
Mother Earth, is the most popular recipient of sacrificial offerings, since she
shares herself with human beings, helps bring forth crops and distributes
riches to those she favors. She has quite an appetite for coca, alcohol and
the blood of animals, particularly white llamas. If you’re wondering about
all the llama fetuses in the markets, they are wrapped up and buried under
new constructions, especially homes, as an offering to Pachamama.
Among the Aymará and Quechua mountain gods, the apus and achachilas are important. The apus, mountain spirits who protect travelers, are
often associated with a particular nevado (snowcapped peak). Illimani, for
example, is an apu who looks over inhabitants of La Paz. Achachilas are
spirits of the high mountains; believed to be ancestors of the people, they
look after their ayllu (loosely translated as ‘tribe’) and provide bounty from
the earth.
Ekeko, which means ‘dwarf’ in Aymará, is the jolly little household god
of abundance. Since he’s responsible for matchmaking, finding homes for
the homeless and ensuring success for businesspeople, he’s well looked
after, especially during the Alasitas festival in La Paz.
One of the most bizarre and fascinating Aymará rituals is the Fiesta de las
Ñatitas (Festival of Skulls), which is celebrated one week after Day of the
Dead. Ñatitas (skulls) are presented at the cemetery chapel in La Paz to be
blessed by a Catholic priest. Parish priests shy away from associating this
rite with Mass, but have begrudgingly recognized the custom. The skulls
are adorned with offerings of flowers, candles and coca leaves, and many
even sport sunglasses and a lit cigarette between their teeth. While some
people own the skulls of deceased loved ones and friends (who they believe
are watching over them), many anonymous craniums are believed to have
been purchased from morgues and (so it is claimed) medical faculties. After
the blessings, the decorated ñatitas are carted back to the owners’ houses to
bring good luck and protection. This ancient Aymará ritual was practiced in
secret but, nowadays, the chapel’s head count is growing every year.
Shamans oversee religious festivals, read fortunes and provide homemade traditional cures throughout Bolivia. Your closest experiences with
shamans will be near Copacabana during religious festivals, or in remote
regions in the Amazon jungle where packaged-for-tourists Ayahuasca
healers ply their craft – be aware that Ayahuasca is a powerful
hallucinogenic and that there have been tourist deaths related to its effects.
Stone talismans are also used in daily life to encourage prosperity or to
protect a person from evil. A turtle is thought to bring health, a frog or toad
carries good fortune, an owl signifies wisdom and success in school, and a
condor will ensure a good journey. You can buy these in La Paz’ Mercado
de Hechicería (Witches’ Market) and throughout the country.
Further
Study
»La Misk’isimi (Sweet
Mouth in Quechua)
Story by Adolfo Costa
du Rels.
»www.mamani.com
Contempor- ary Aymará
artist Mamani Mamani.
»Sayari Breakthrough
film with an allindigenous cast directed
by Mela Márques.
WEAVING
Bolivian textiles come in diverse patterns displaying a degree of skill
resulting from millennia of artistry and tradition. The most common piece is
a manta or aguayo, a square shawl made of two handwoven strips joined
edge to edge. Also common are the chuspa (coca pouch), chullo (knitted
hat), falda (skirt), woven belts and touristy items such as camera bags made
from remnants.
Regional differences are manifested in weaving
style, motif and use. Weavings from Tarabuco often
feature intricate zoomorphic patterns, while
distinctive red-and-black designs come from Potolo,
northwest of Sucre. Zoomorphic patterns are also
prominent in the wild Charazani country north of
Lake Titicaca and in several Altiplano areas outside
La Paz, including Lique and Calamarka.
Some extremely fine weavings originate in Sica
Sica, one of the many dusty and nondescript villages
between La Paz and Oruro, while in Calcha,
southeast of Potosí, expert spinning and an extremely
tight weave – more than 150 threads per inch –
produce Bolivia’s finest textiles.
Vicuña fibers, the finest and most expensive in the
world, are produced in Apolobamba and in Parque
Nacional Sajama.
MUSIC & DANCE
While all Andean musical traditions have evolved from a series of pre-Inca,
Inca, Spanish, Amazonian and even African influences, each region of
Bolivia has developed distinctive musical traditions, dances and
instruments.
The instrument Bolivia is most known for, and understandably proud of,
is the charango, considered the king of all stringed instruments. Modeled
after the Spanish vihuela and mandolin, it gained initial popularity in Potosí
during the city’s mining heyday. Another instrument commonplace in the
gringo markets is the quena, a small flute made of cane, bone or ceramic.
The instrument predates Europeans by many centuries and the earliest
examples, made of stone, were found near Potosí. A curious instrument
known as a jaguar-caller comes from the Amazon region. This hollowedout calabash, with a small hole into which the player inserts his hand, seems
to do the trick in calling the big cats to the hunt.
MESTIZA DRESS
The characteristic dress worn by many Bolivian indigenous women was imposed on them in the
18th century by the Spanish king, and the customary central parting of the hair was the result of
a decree by the Viceroy of Toledo.
This distinctive ensemble, both colorful and utilitarian, has almost become Bolivia’s defining
image. The most noticeable characteristic of the traditional Aymará dress is the ubiquitous dark
green, black or brown bowler hat. Remarkably, these are not attached with hat pins but merely
balanced on the head.
The women normally braid their hair into two long plaits that are joined by a tuft of black
wool known as a pocacha. The pollera skirts they wear are constructed of several horizontal
pleats, worn over multiple layers of petticoats. Traditionally, only a married woman’s skirt was
pleated, while a single female’s was not. Today, most of the synthetic materials for these
brightly colored polleras are imported from South Korea.
The women also wear a factory-made blouse, a woolen chompa (sweater/jumper), a short
vestlike jacket and a cotton apron, or some combination of these. Usually, they add a shawl,
known as a manta. Fashion dictates subtleties, such as the length of both the skirt and the tassels
on the shawl.
Some sling an aguayo (also spelled ahuayo), a rectangle of manufactured or handwoven cloth
decorated with colorful horizontal bands, across their backs. It’s used as a carryall and is filled
with everything from coca or groceries to babies.
The Quechua of the highland valleys wear equally colorful, but not so universally recognized,
attire. The hat, called a montera, is a flat-topped affair made of straw or finely woven white
wool. It’s often taller and broader than the bowlers worn by the Aymará. The felt monteras (aka
morriones) of Tarabuco, patterned after Spanish conquistadors’ helmets, are the most striking.
Women’s skirts are usually made of velour and are shorter in length.
Traditional Altiplano dances celebrate war, fertility, hunting prowess,
marriage and work. After the Spanish arrived, European dances and those
of the African slaves were introduced, resulting in the hybrid dances that
now characterize many Bolivian celebrations.
Oruro’s Carnaval draws huge local and international crowds. Potosí is
famed for its re-creations of the region’s tinku (ritual fighting) tradition,
while La Paz is renowned for La Morenada, which re-enacts the dance of
African slaves brought to the courts of Viceroy Felipe III.
Top of section
A 2008 World Bank report concluded
that climate change would eliminate
many glaciers in the Andes within 20
years, threatening the existence of nearly
100 million people.
The Natural World
When people think of Bolivia they generally conjure up images of
somewhere high (La Paz), dry (Altiplano) and salty (Uyuni salt plains).
While this may be true for large areas of the country, there’s much more to
the Bolivian landscape than just mountains. The range of altitude – from
130m in the jungles of the Amazon Basin to 6542m on the peaks of the
rugged Andes – has resulted in a huge variety of ecological and geological
niches supporting a bewildering variety of nature. Environmentally it is one
of the most diverse countries on the continent.
The country has 1415 bird species and
5000 described plant species, some of
the highest numbers in the world. It’s
also among the neotropical countries
with the highest level of endemism
(species which exist only in Bolivia),
with 21 birds, 28 reptiles, 72 amphibians
and 25 mammals found nowhere else on
earth.
But while it may seem obvious that Bolivia’s natural resources are one of
its greatest assets, not everybody values assets that don’t have a direct
monetary value. From the lush tropical forests of Amboró National Park to
the wetlands of the Pantanal, the scrub that obscures the Chaco gas fields
and the Polylepis woodlands of the Andes, the Bolivian environment is
under constant threat from destruction for economic exploitation.
At 1,098,581 sq km, landlocked Bolivia
is South America’s fifth-largest country,
three-and-a-half times the size of the
British Isles.
The Andean condor, one of the world’s
heaviest flying birds, has a 3m wingspan
and can effortlessly drag a 20kg carcass.
THE LAND
Two Andean mountain chains define the west of the country, with many
peaks above 6000m. The Cordillera Occidental, in the west, stands between
Bolivia and the Pacific coast. The eastern Cordillera Real runs southeast,
then turns south across central Bolivia, joining the other chain to form the
southern Cordillera Central.
The haunting Altiplano (altitude
3500m to 4000m) is boxed in by these
two great cordilleras. It’s an immense,
nearly treeless plain punctuated by
mountains and solitary volcanic peaks.
At the Altiplano’s northern end,
straddling the Peruvian border, Lake
Titicaca is one of the world’s highest navigable lakes. In the far
southwestern corner, the land is drier and less populated. The salty remnants
of two vast ancient lakes, the Salar de Uyuni and the Salar de Coipasa, are
there as well.
East of the Cordillera Central are the Central Highlands, a region of
scrubby hills, valleys and fertile basins with a Mediterranean-like climate.
North of the Cordillera Real, the rainy Yungas form a transition zone
between arid highlands and humid lowlands.
More than half of Bolivia’s total area
is in the Amazon Basin, with sweaty
tropical rainforest in the western section,
and flat cerrados (savannas) and
extensions of the Pantanal wetland in the
east. In the country’s southeastern corner
is the nearly impenetrable scrubland of the Gran Chaco, an arid, thorny
forest that experiences the highest temperatures in the country.
The national flower of Bolivia is the
kantuta; not only is it aesthetically
beautiful, but it also reflects the color of
the national flag.
WILDLIFE
Animals
Bolivia is one of the best places on the continent to observe wildlife, and
even seasoned wildlife watchers will be impressed by the diversity on show.
The distribution of wildlife is dictated by the country’s geography and
varies considerably from region to region. The Altiplano is home to
vicuñas, flamingos and condors; the Chaco to secretive jaguars, pumas and
peccaries; the Pantanal provides refuge for giant otters, marsh deer and
waterbirds; and the Amazon Basin contains the richest density of species on
earth, featuring an incredible variety of reptiles, parrots, monkeys,
hummingbirds, butterflies, fish and bugs (by the zillion!).
Of course, the animals that steal the
show are the regional giants: the
majestic jaguar, the continent’s top
predator; the elephant-nosed tapir (anta)
and the giant anteater. The ostrich-like
rhea or ñandú, the continent’s biggest
bird, is here too and it can be
surprisingly common in some areas. You may even be lucky enough to spot
the breathtaking Andean condor – revered by the Inca – soaring on
mountain thermals.
River travelers are almost certain to see capybaras (like giant aquatic
guineapigs) and caimans (alligators). It’s not unusual to see anacondas in
the rivers of the department of Beni, and a spot of piranha fishing is
virtually an obligation for anybody spending time in the Amazon.
Overland travelers frequently see armadillos, foxes, jochis (agoutis) and
the gray-faced, llama-like guanaco. Similar, but more delicately
proportioned, is the fuzzy vicuña, once mercilessly hunted for its woolly
coat but now recovering well. You won’t have to work quite as hard to spot
their domesticated relatives, the llama and the alpaca.
Plants
Because of its enormous range of altitudes, Bolivia enjoys a wealth and
diversity of flora rivaled only by its Andean neighbors. No fewer than 895
plants are considered endemic to the country, including 16 species of
passionfruit vines and at least three genera of orchids.
In the overgrazed highlands, the only remaining vegetable species are
those with some defense against grazing livestock or those that are not
suitable for firewood. Much of what does grow in the highlands grows
slowly and is endangered, including the globally threatened genus of
Polylepis shrubs which form dense, low forests at altitudes of up to 5300m,
making them the highest growing arborescent plants in the world.
The lower elevations of the temperate highland hills and valleys support
vegetation superficially reminiscent of that of Spain or California. The area
around Samaipata is particularly rich in endemic plants, including a cactus
Samaipaticereus and a bromeliad Tillandsia samaipatensis, while the
gigantic Bolivian mountain coconut Parajubaea torallyi of the interAndean valleys is the world’s highest growing palm.
The moist upper slopes of the Yungas are characterized by dwarf forest.
Further down the slopes stretches the cloud forest, where the trees grow
larger and the vegetation thicker. Northern Bolivia’s lowlands consist of
islands of true rainforest dotted with vast wetlands and endangered
cerrados, while the Amazon Basin contains the richest botanical diversity
on earth.
ENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES
Bolivia’s environmental problems may not yet have reached apocalyptic proportions, but
environmentalists are concerned that accelerating economic growth is not being tempered by the
necessary measures to maintain a sound ecological balance. Besides extensive land clearing for
agricultural monocultures (particularly soybean), ranching and hydrocarbon exploration, there
are also concerns about the future of freshwater supplies, with glaciers melting and the rivers
increasingly polluted.
Many nonprofit organizations are working on countrywide environmental conservation
efforts, including the following local groups:
»Asociación Armonía (www.armonia-bo.org) Everything you need to
know about bird-watching and bird conservation.
More than 40% of the Bolivian territory
is affected by desertification caused by
climate change, population increase and
indiscriminate forest felling.
»Fundación Amigos de la Naturaleza ( Click here ) One of the most
active of the local conservation groups, working at the national level.
»Protección del Medioambiente del Tarija (Prometa;
www.elgranchaco.com/prometa) Works in the Gran Chaco region on a
series of social and conservation initiatives.
Threatened Species
Though it’s the anteaters and jaguars that get all the headlines, these species
are widespread throughout South America, and the most threatened
members of the Bolivian fauna are not necessarily the most conspicuous or
famous. There are exceptions, of course: the endangered Chaco peccary, an
enormous piglike creature known only from fossil remains until 1976; the
elusive spectacled bear; or the Golden Palace titi monkey, which hit the
world headlines when a Canadian casino paid a fortune for the rights to
name it.
Among the most threatened wildlife in the highlands are the little-known
deer, the North Andean huemul, the Andean hairy armadillo and the
endemic short-tailed chinchilla, sought out for its luxurious fur. The
windswept lakes of the southern Altiplano are the exclusive habitat of the
rare James flamingo, while the charming Cochabamba mountain finch has a
total range of just 3500 sq km perilously close to the outskirts of the city of
Cochabamba.
The Amazon Basin may be famous for
its pink river dolphins, but rather lesserknown is the blue-throated macaw
(barba azul), a species considered
critically endangered and thought to
number fewer than 300 individuals. The
mythical unicorn bird of the Yungas,
more properly known as the horned currasow, was long thought to be
extinct until its recent rediscovery. In the Pantanal region the golden spearnosed bat lives only in a handful of caves, while the hyacinth macaw has
suffered for its comical appearance through capture for the pet trade.
Some of Bolivia’s most remarkable threatened species, however, won’t
win any awards for attractiveness. Consider the bizarre marsupial frogs of
the genus Gastrotheca, which includes five species in Bolivia that are all
threatened with extinction, and the Jabba the Hutt–like Titicaca giant frog,
confined to Bolivia’s most famous lake. The latter can weigh up to 400g
and is under extreme pressure because of a local belief that drinking the
juice from the liquidized amphibian has aphrodisiacal properties. You can
find more information about them online at
http://bolivianamphibianinitiative.org.
EL CHAQUEO: THE BIG SMOKE
Each dry season, from July to September, Bolivia’s skies fill with a thick pall of smoke,
obscuring the air, occasionally canceling flights, aggravating allergies and causing respiratory
strife. This is all the result of el chaqueo, the slashing and burning of the savannas (and some
forest) for agricultural and grazing land. A prevailing notion is that the rising smoke forms rain
clouds and ensures good rains for the coming season. In reality the hydrological cycle, which
depends on transpiration from the forest canopy, is interrupted by the deforestation resulting in
diminished rainfall.
Ranchers in the Beni department have long set fire to the savannas annually to encourage the
sprouting of new grass. These days, however, the most dramatic defoliation occurs along the
highways in the country’s east, the new agricultural frontier. Here the forest is being consumed
by expanding cattle ranches and pristine natural habitat is being replaced by seemingly endless
monocultures. Although the burned vegetable matter initially provides rich nutrients for crops,
those nutrients aren’t replenished. After two or three years the land is exhausted and it takes 15
years for it to become productive again. That’s too long for most farmers to wait; most just pull
up stakes and burn larger areas.
As the rural population increases, so do the effects of el chaqueo. Despite the fact that this
burning is prohibited by Bolivian forestry statutes, the law has proved impos- sible to enforce in
the vast Bolivian lowlands. The long-term implications aren’t yet known but international
pressure to reduce the negative effects of the burning has seen the Bolivian government
implement a program encouraging lowland farmers to minimize el chaqueo in favor of
alternatives that don’t drain the soil of nutrients, and culminated in the signing of a joint
agreement with Brazil and Italy to reduce burning in the Amazon region. Despite this, it seems
that el chaqueo will be a fact of life in Bolivia for many years to come.
NATIONAL PARKS & RESERVES
Bolivia has protected 18% of its total land by declaring 22 national
protected areas and additional regional reserves under what is known as the
Sistema Nacional de Áreas Protegidas (SNAP). The system is one of the
most extensive on the continent, but even though it covers much of
Bolivia’s most amazing landscapes, the reality is that most reserves are only
nominally protected.
The system of protected areas is managed by the government-run
administrative body Servicio Nacional de Áreas Protegidas (SERNAP;
www.sernap.gob.bo). In order to try to address the chronic financial and
staffing issues that this body faces, local and international NGOs have
worked with SERNAP to create innovative ways to preserve select habitats,
with varying degrees of success.
Such projects have typically aimed to encourage local involvement and
co-management of protected areas in an effort to attract tourists to
community-based, ecotourism experiences, as well as to produce
commercially viable natural products, including medicinal patents. A
comprehensive guide to such initiatives in Bolivia was published in 2008:
Desde adentro (Deep Inside Bolivia).
Survival Guide
DIRECTORY A-Z
Accommodations
Business Hours
Children
Customs Regulations
Discount Cards
Electricity
Embassies & Consulates
Food
Gay & Lesbian Travelers
Insurance
Internet Access
Language Courses
Legal Matters
Maps
Money
Photography
Post
Public Holidays
Safe Travel
Shopping
Solo Travelers
Telephone
Time
Toilets
Tourist Information
Travelers with Disabilities
Visas
Volunteering
Women Travelers
Work
TRANSPORTATION
GETTING THERE & AWAY
Entering the Country
Air
Land & River
GETTING AROUND
Air
Bicycle
Boat
Bus
Car & Motorcycle
Hitchhiking
Local Transportation
Tours
Train
HEALTH
LANGUAGE
Top of section
Accommodations
Bolivian accommodations are among South America’s cheapest, though
price and value are hardly uniform. Be aware that, with the exception of the
international hotel chains, the star ratings for hotels are not based on the
recognized international rating system.
The Bolivian hotel-rating system divides accommodations into posadas
(inns), alojamientos (basic accommodations), residenciales (simple
accommodations), casas de huéspedes (family-run guesthouses), hostales
(hostels) and hoteles (hotels). This subjective zero- to five-star rating
system reflects the price scale and, to some extent, the quality. (Note that
hostales are not necessarily hostels as you might normally think; some are
in fact upmarket hotels.) Rock-bottom places are usually found around bus
and train stations, though this area is often the most dangerous in town.
Prices in this book reflect high-season rates (late May to early
September). Room availability is only a problem at popular weekend
getaways such as Coroico and during fiestas (especially Carnaval in Oruro
and festivals in Copa- cabana), when prices double.
In the Altiplano, heat and hot water often make the difference in price,
while in lowland areas, air-con and fans are common factors.
The sleeping sections in this book are organized by author preference.
Always ask to see a couple of rooms before committing, keep your
valuables in a safe when available and check the sheets for bedbugs by
searching for their feces beneath pillows. You can sometimes negotiate the
room price in cheaper places.
Warning: several readers have alerted us to improper use of propane
heaters in Bolivia. These are sometimes offered in cheaper accommodations
but are not meant to be used in enclosed spaces, so refrain from using them
if supplied.
Directory
    A–Z  
Camping
Bolivia offers excellent camping, especially along trekking routes and in
remote mountain areas. Gear (of varying quality) is easily rented in La Paz
and at popular trekking base camps such as Sorata. There are few organized
campsites, but you can pitch a tent almost anywhere outside population
centers, although it’s always a good idea to ask for permission if possible.
Remember that highland nights are often freezing.
Theft and assaults have been reported in some areas – always inquire
locally about security before heading off to set up camp.
Hostels
Hostelling International (HI; www.hostellingbolivia.org) is affiliated with
a network of 15 accommodations in different parts of Bolivia. For
affordable accommodations, check out www.boliviahostels.com. Most
hostels have common areas, bunk beds in shared rooms, shared bathrooms
with or without hot water, book exchanges, wi-fi, and some even come with
pubs and Jacuzzis. You can often get cheaper accommodations at low-end
hotels, but you’ll miss out on the traveler culture.
Hostales & Hotels
Bolivia has pleasant midrange places and five-star luxury resorts, but these
are mostly limited to the larger cities and popular vacation and weekend
resort destinations. Standard hotel amenities include breakfast, private
bathroom with 24/7 hot shower (gas- or electric-heated), phones, wi-fi and
color TV, usually with cable. Save big by booking ahead with online
aggregators at www.hotels.com and www.expedia.com ilk.
BOOK YOUR STAY ONLINE
For more accommodation reviews by Lonely Planet authors, check out hotels.lonelyplanet.com.
You’ll find independent reviews, as well as recommendations on the best places to stay. Best of
all, you can book online.
Posadas, Alojamientos, Residenciales & Casas de
Huéspedes
The accommodations at the cheapest end can be pretty bad. The worst
posadas can be smelly, with showers scarce and hot water unheard of. Most
alojamientos have communal bathrooms with electric showers (to avoid
electric shock, don’t touch the shower while the water is running and wear
rubber sandals). Most travelers end up at residenciales with private or
shared bathrooms. C asas de huéspedes sometimes offer a more midrange,
B&B-like atmosphere.
Business Hours
Standard banking hours are 9am to 4pm or 6pm Monday to Friday, and
10am to noon or 5pm Saturday. Most businesses are closed on Sundays,
save for restaurants. Markets stir as early as 6am and some are open on
Sunday mornings. Shops sometimes close from noon to 2pm on weekdays,
and are open from 10am to noon or 5pm on Saturdays. Restaurant hours
vary, but they are generally open for breakfast (8am to 10am), lunch (noon
to 3pm) and dinner (6pm to 10pm or 11pm).
PRICE RANGES
The following price ranges refer to a double room with bathroom in high season, including all
taxes and fees.
La Paz
$ less than B$180 (US$25)
$$ B$180-560 (US$25-80)
$$$ more than B$560 (US$80)
Rest of Bolivia
$ less than B$160 (US$22)
$$ B$160-400 (US$22-57)
$$$ more than B$400 (US$57)
Children
There are a few things to consider before bringing your children to Bolivia,
including the following:
Altitude Potentially tough on tots.
Bugs Bites can be problematic because of potential disease. Your best
defense is not to get bitten.
Climate Can be extreme.
Comfort Bumpy roads and long distances can make for unhappy campers.
Food Diarrhea is common.
Political instability There are more than 1000 ongoing conflicts in Bolivia
today, and roadblocks and tear gas are not uncommon.
Vaccines You’ll probably want them for visits to the lowlands, but many
can be dangerous for children younger than two and for breastfeeding
moms.
On the plus side, Bolivians love children, it’s a one-of-a-kind cultural
experience for them, and bringing your children in tow will do wonders for
breaking down cultural barriers. All things considered, many still choose to
leave their children at home.
As a general rule, civilian airlines charge 10% of adult ticket prices
and/or airport taxes and fees for children under the age of two, who must sit
on your lap. On long-distance buses, those who occupy a seat will normally
have to pay the full fare. Some hotels have family rooms with three or four
beds. Restaurants rarely advertise children’s portions, but will often offer a
child-sized serving at a lower price, or will allow two kids to share an adult
meal.
Cribs, diaper-changing facilities and child-care services are only
available in the finest hotels in big cities. Breastfeeding in public is
widespread. Formula milk is available in modern supermarkets in big cities,
as are disposable diapers. If you plan on driving, bring your car seat from
home.
There are fantastic children’s museums in La Paz and Sucre, plus a water
park in Santa Cruz. Most Bolivians spend Sunday afternoons picnicking
with the family in parks and zoos or strolling the traffic-free pedestrian
walks of La Paz and Cochabamba.
For more information, advice and anecdotes, see Lonely Planet’s Travel
with Children.
Checklist
»First aid kit including diarrhea tablets, rehydration salts, sunscreen, bug
spray, Neosporin, Band-Aids, acetaminophen, thermometer
»Required vaccines, passports and visas, as kids need them too
»Snacks and favorite foods from home
»Clothes and sun hat for all weather
»Parental permission note if traveling solo
»Baby carrier, as strollers are basically pointless
»Favorite toys
»Wipes
Customs Regulations
When entering Bolivia, you can bring in most articles duty-free provided
you can convince customs that they are for personal use. There’s also a
loosely enforced duty-free allowance of 200 cigarettes and 1L of alcohol
per person.
Discount Cards
The International Student Travel Confederation (ISTC;
www.aboutistc.org) is an international network of student travel
organizations. It’s also the body behind the International Student Identity
Card (ISIC), which gives carriers discounts on a few services in Bolivia.
Electricity
Embassies & Consulates
For a full list of foreign dip- lomatic representation in Bolivia, see
www.embassiesabroad.com/embassies-in/Bolivia.
Argentine Embassy in La Paz ( 2-241- 7737; www.mrecic.gov.ar;
Aspiazu 475); consulates in Cochabamba ( 4-425-5859; Federico Blanco
929), Santa Cruz ( 3-334-7133; Junín 22), Tarija ( 4-664-4273; Bolívar
696) and Villazón ( 2-596-5253; Saavedra 311)
Australian ( 7061-0626, 2-211-5655; australiaconsbolivia@mac.com;
Aspiazu 416, La Paz)
Brazilian Embassy in La Paz ( 2-216-6400; www.brasil.org.bo; Arce
2739, Edificio Multicentro); consul- ates in Cochabamba ( 4-425-5860;
Av Oquendo N-1080), Guayaramerín ( 3-855-3766; 24 de Septiembre 28),
Santa Cruz ( 3-334-4400; Germán Busch 330) and Sucre ( 4-645-2661;
Arenales 212)
Canadian ( 2-241-5141; international.gc.ca; Victor Sanjinés 2678, 2nd
fl, La Paz)
Chilean Consulates in La Paz ( 2-279-7331; www.chileabroad.gov.cl;
Calle 14 No 8024, Calacoto) and Santa Cruz ( 3-335-8989; René Moreno
551, 1st fl)
Ecuadorian Embassy in La Paz ( 2-278-4422; Calle 10 No 8054,
Calacoto); consulate in Sucre ( 4-646-0622; Los Ceibos 2, Barrio
Tucsupaya)
French ( 2-214-9900; www.ambafrance-bo.org; Fernando Siles 5390 at
Calle 8, Obrajes, La Paz)
German Embassy in La Paz ( 2-244-0066; www.la-paz.diplo.de; Arce
2395); consulates in Cochabamba ( 4-425-4024; cnr España & Heroínas,
Edificio La Promontora, 6th fl) and Sucre ( 4-645-2091; Rosenda Villa
54)
Italian ( 2-278-8506; www.amblapaz.esteri.it; Calle 5 No 458, Obrajes,
La Paz)
Paraguayan ( 2-243-3176; Pedro Salazar 351, Edificio Illimani, La Paz)
Peruvian ( 2-244-0631; Av 6 de Agosto 2827, La Paz)
Spanish Embassy in La Paz ( 2-211-7820; www.maec.es; Av 6 de Agosto
2827); consul- ates in Santa Cruz ( 3-332-8921; Santiesteban 237) and
Santa Cruz ( 3-312-1349; cnr Av Cañoto & Peru)
UK Embassy in La Paz ( 2-243-3424; www.ukinbolivia.fco.gov.uk/en;
Arce 2732); consulate in Santa Cruz ( 3-353-5035; Santa Cruz
International School, Km 7.5)
US Embassy in La Paz ( 2-216-8000; http://lapaz.usembassy.gov; Av
Aniceto Arce 2780); consulate in Santa Cruz ( 3-351-3477; Av Roque
Aguilera 146)
Food
The eating recommendations provided in this book are ordered by author
preference. In larger cities, they are also often broken down by
neighborhood where applicable.
Altiplano fare tends to be starchy and full of carbo- hydrates. In the
lowlands, fish, fruit and vegetables feature more prominently. Meat
invariably dominates and is usually accompanied by rice, a starchy tuber
(usually potato) and shredded lettuce. Often, the whole affair is drowned
with llajua (a fiery tomato-based salsa). The soups are a specialty.
Desayuno (breakfast) consists of little more than coffee and a bread roll,
and is often followed by a mid-morning street snack such as a salteña (meat
and vegetable pasty), tucumana (an empanada-like pastry) or empanada.
Almuerzo (lunch) is the main meal of the day. The best-value meals are
found in and around markets (often under B$10) and at no-frills restaurants
offering set lunches (usually between B$15 and B$40). Cena, the evening
meal, is mostly served à la carte. Many highlanders prefer a light té (tea)
instead of an evening meal.
Vegetarian options are on the rise, but you’ll be stuck with lots of overly
cooked vegetables, rice, potatoes, pizza and pasta. Quinoa is a super grain,
perfect for vegetarians.
Got a nut allergy? Maní means ‘peanut’ and is a popular ingredient,
especially in soups.
Basics
Do not drink tap water, or eat unpeeled vegetables and fruits. You will
likely get traveler’s stomache (a nice euphemism for diarrhea), and if you
do, stay hydrated and eat plain food.
Formal tipping is haphazard except in the nicer restaurants. Elsewhere,
locals leave coins amounting to a maximum of 10% of the total in
recognition of good service.
PRICE RANGES
The following price ranges refer to the cost of a main meal:
$ less than B$30 (US$4.20)
$$ B$30-60 (US$4.20-8.50)
$$$ more than B$60 (US$8.50)
Snacks & Soups
Scrumptious street snacks include empanadas, tucumanas, salteñas, tamales
(cornmeal-dough pockets filled with spiced beef, vegetables, potatoes
and/or cheese) and humintas (or humitas; cornmeal filled with cheese,
onion, egg and spices, baked in the oven or boiled). For a hearty snack, try
anticuchos (grilled cow heart on skewers), served at markets or street stalls.
A large bowl of sopa (soup) – whether vegetarian or meat-based – is the
start of every great Bolivian meal. The most popular soups are the delicious
maní (peanut) soup and chairo, a hearty soup using many Andean
ingredients including chuños (freeze-dried potatoes), meat and vegetables,
and often topped with crispy fried pigskin. Chupe, cha’que and lawa (aka
lagua) are the most common thick, stew-like soups. Quinoa and maní are
often used to thicken broth.
Meats
Beef is typically asado (barbecued) or parrillada (grilled) in various cuts,
including lomo (filet), brazuelo (shank) and churrasco (skirt steak). Jerked
beef, llama or other red meat is called charque. A popular dish is pique a lo
macho, a plate of chopped grilled beef and sausage served with po- tatoes,
onions, lettuce, to- matoes and locoto (chili peppers). On the Altiplano, beef
is often served with choclo (corn), corn on the cob, or mote (rehydrated
dried corn kernels); in the lowlands it’s served with yuca or mashed
plantain. In the Beni, beef may be served as pacumutus, enormous chunks
of grilled meat accompanied by yuca, onions and other trimmings.
Pollo (chicken) is either frito (fried), al spiedo or a la broaster (cooked
on a spit), asado, or dorado (broiled). Cheap chicken restaurants are
ubiquitous in Bolivia, where a meal of chicken and potatoes costs around
B$7.
On the Altiplano the most deservedly popular pescado (fish) are trucha
(trout) and pejerrey (kingfish), introduced species from Lake Titicaca.
Fruits
Many deliciously juicy South American fruits are cultivated in Bolivia.
Most notable are the chirimoya (custard apple) , tuna (prickly pear cactus)
and maracuya and tumbo passion fruits.
In the lowlands, the range of exotic tropical fruits defies middle-latitude
expectations. Among the more unusual are the human hand–shaped
ambaiba; the small, round, green-and-purple guaypurú; the spiny yellow
ocoro; the lemon-like guapomo; the bean-like cupesi; the marayau, which
resembles a bunch of giant grapes; the currant-like nui; the scaly onionlooking sinini; and the stomach-shaped paquio.
Drinks
Top cervezas (beers) include Paceña, Huari, Sureña, Taquiña, Potosina and
Tropical Extra. Vino (wine) is good, especially around Tarija. Singani is a
white grape brandy, popular in a chufflay (mixed drink with soda or
lemonade). Chicha is a fermented corn drink popular in the countryside.
On the nonalcoholic drink side, Api is made from a ground purple corn,
while mate de coca is an infusion of water and dried coca leaves. Another
wonderful hot drink is trimate, a combination of chamomile, coca and
anise. A must try is a mocochinche, a sugary peach drink made from boiled
cane sugar, cinnamon sticks and featuring a floating dried peach (another
Andean food-preservation marvel). Also popular are the sweet and nutty
tostada and the corn-based horchata and licuados (fruit shakes blended
with water or milk).
Gay & Lesbian Travelers
Homosexuality is legal in Bolivia but still not widely accepted.
Gay bars and venues are limited to the larger cities, especially Santa Cruz
and La Paz, but these are still somewhat clandestine affairs. As for hotels,
sharing a room is no problem – but discretion is still in order.
Gay-rights lobby groups are active in La Paz (MGLP Libertad),
Cochabamba (Dignidad) and, most visibly, in progressive Santa Cruz,
which held Bolivia’s first Gay Pride march in 2001. La Paz is known for La
Familia Galán, the capital’s most fabulous group of cross-dressing queens
who aim to educate Bolivians around issues of sexuality and gender through
theater performances. The feminist activist group Mujeres Creando is based
in La Paz and promotes the rights of oppressed groups.
Insurance
A good travel insurance policy to cover theft, loss and medical mishaps is
important.
There is a wide variety of policies available: shop around and scrutinize
the fine print. Some policies specifically exclude ‘dangerous activities,’
which can include skiing, motorcycling, mountain biking and even
trekking. Check that the policy covers ambulances and emergency airlift
evacuations.
Worldwide travel insurance is available at
www.lonelyplanet.com/travel_services. You can buy, extend and claim
online anytime – even if you’re already on the road.
Some other companies include the following:
ETA (www.eta.co.uk)
Insure My Trip (www.insuremytrip.com)
Travel Guard (www.travelguard.com)
World Nomads (www.worldnomads.com)
Internet Access
Nearly every corner of Bolivia has a cyber cafe, and wi-fi is now standard
in most midrange and top-end hotels (and many cafes). Rates run from B$2
to B$5 per hour. In smaller towns, expect to pay more – check the local
Entel offices and be ready for slow satellite connections.
Language Courses
Language courses are offered in Cochabamba, Coroico, La Paz, Oruro and
Sucre. Including a homestay will greatly expand your cultural exposure and
increase your learning curve.
PRACTICALITIES
Addresses In addresses s/n means sin número (no street number). In smaller cities, landmarks
are preferred to street names to get around.
Electricity Most electricity currents are 220V AC, at 50Hz. Most plugs and sockets are the twopin, round-prong variety, but a few anomalous American-style two-pin, parallel flat-pronged
sockets exist.
Newspapers Most locals take their coca tea or cafecito (‘little’ coffee) with La Razón (www.larazon.com, in Spanish), the nation’s biggest daily newspaper. In Sucre seek out El Correo del
Sur (www.correodelsur.com, in Spanish); in Santa Cruz, El Deber (www.eldeber.com.bo, in
Spanish). International periodicals are sold in bigger cities.
Radio For a 24/7 stream of Andean artists, browse Bolivia Web Radio
(www.boliviaweb.com/radio). Radio Panamericana (www.panamericana-bolivia.com) is popular
all around Bolivia.
Television Switch on the TV to watch the government-run Canal 7 (www.boliviatv.bo, in
Spanish) or the private ATB TV (www.atb.com.bo, in Spanish) network. Opposition to the
government is shown on UNITEL (www.unitel.tv, in Spanish) out of Santa Cruz. Cable TV with
international stations is available in most upmarket hotels.
Weights and measures Use the metric system, except when buying produce at street markets,
where everything is sold in libras (pounds; 1lb = 0.45kg).
Legal Matters
The biggest legal problems include trafficking and possession of cocaine
and other drugs, minor traffic violations and sex-related crimes.
If you are arrested, foreign embassies should be contacted immediately.
Note, however, that they don’t have the power to resolve the legalities (or
illegalities) if you break the law.
Be aware that more recently incidences of fake police have been on the
rise.
See also the La Paz chapter ( Click here ) for more on safety issues for
travelers.
Maps
Maps are available in La Paz, Cochabamba and Santa Cruz through Los
Amigos del Libro and other bookstores. Government 1:50,000
topographical and specialty sheets are available from the Instituto
Geográfico Militar (IGM), with offices in La Paz and in most other major
cities.
International sources for hard-to-find maps include the US-based
Maplink (www.maplink.com) and Omnimap (www.omnimap.com), and
the UK-based Stanfords (www.stanfords.co.uk). In Germany, try
Deutscher Alpenverein (www.alpenverein.de), which publishes its own
series of climbing maps.
See the Bolivia Outdoors chapter ( Click here ) for more about maps and
guidebooks.
Money
ATMs
Sizeable towns have cajeros automáticos (ATMs) – usually Banco Nacional
de Bolivia, Banco Bisa, Banco Mercantil Santa Cruz and Banco Unión.
They dispense bolivianos in 50 and 100 notes (sometimes US dollars as
well) on Visa, MasterCard, Plus and Cirrus cards; note that in the past,
many Europeans have reported trouble using their cards. In smaller towns,
the local bank Prodem is a good option for cash advances on Visa and
MasterCard (3% to 6% commission charged) and many branches are meant
to be open on Saturday mornings; the hours and machines are unreliable.
Don’t rely on ATMs; always carry some cash with you, especially if
venturing into rural areas.
Change
Finding change for bills larger than B$10 is a national pastime, as change
for larger notes is scarce outside big cities. When exchanging money or
making big purchases, request the cambio (change) in small denominations.
If you can stand the queues, most banks will break large bills. Also, check
any larger bills for damage as you may not be able to change them if they’re
torn or taped together.
Counterfeits
Counterfeit bolivianos and US dollars are less common than they used to
be, but it still happens more often than you’d like.
Credit Cards
Brand-name plastic – such as Visa, MasterCard and (less often) American
Express – may be used in larger cities at the better hotels, restaurants and
tour agencies.
Currency
Bolivia uses the boliviano (B$). Most prices are pegged to the US dollar.
Only crisp US dollar bills are accepted (they are the currency for savings).
The boliviano is divided into 100 centavos . Bolivianos come in 10, 20,
50, 100 and 200 denomination notes, with coins worth 1, 2 and 5 bolivianos
as well as 10, 20 and 50 centavos. Often called ‘pesos’ (the currency was
changed from pesos to bolivianos in 1987), bolivia- nos are extremely
difficult to unload outside the country.
Exchanging Money
Visitors fare best with US dollars (travelers have reported that it’s difficult
to change euros). Currency may be exchanged at casas de cambio
(exchange offices) and at some banks in larger cities. You can often change
money in travel agencies, hotels and sometimes in stores selling touristy
items. Cambistas (street money changers) operate in most cities but only
change cash dollars, paying roughly the same as casas de cambio. They’re
convenient after hours, but guard against rip-offs and counterfeit notes. The
rate for cash doesn’t vary much from place to place, and there is no blackmarket rate. Currencies of neighboring countries may be exchanged in
border areas and at casas de cambio in La Paz. Beware, too, mangled notes:
unless both halves of a repaired banknote bear identical serial numbers, the
note is worthless. Also note that US$100 bills of the CB-B2 series are not
accepted anywhere, neither are US$50 bills of the AB-B2 series.
International Transfers
The fastest way to have money transferred from abroad is with Western
Union (www.westernunion.com). A newer, alternative option is through
Money Gram (www.moneygram.com), which has offices in all major cities
– watch the hefty fees, though. Your bank can also wire money to a
cooperating Bolivian bank; it may take a couple of business days.
PayPal is increasingly used to make bank transfers to pay for hotels.
A NOTE ABOUT PRICES
Prices in this guidebook are generally listed in bolivianos. However, many higher-end hotels
will only quote prices in US dollars; likewise for many travel agencies and tour operators.
Therefore, prices in this book are listed in bolivianos, except in cases where a business quotes its
costs in US dollars. The currency is fairly stable.
Photography
Keep in mind that the combination of high-altitude ultraviolet rays and light
reflected off snow or water will conspire to fool both your eye and your
light meter.
A polarizing filter is essential when photographing the Altiplano, and
will help to reveal the dramatic effects of the exaggerated UV elem- ent at
high altitude. In the lowlands, conditions include dim light, humidity, haze
and leafy interference.
La Paz is generally the best place to buy equipment and for repairs.
Photographing People
While some Bolivians are willing photo subjects, others may be
superstitious about your camera, suspicious of your motives or interested in
payment. Many children will ask for payment, often after you’ve taken their
photo. It’s best to err on not taking such shots in the first place – be
sensitive to the wishes of locals. Ask permission to photograph if a candid
shot can’t be made; if permission is denied, you should neither insist nor
snap a picture.
Post
Even the smallest towns have post offices – some are signposted ‘Ecobol’
(Empresa Correos de Bolivia). From major towns, the post is generally
reliable (although often involving long delays), but when posting anything
important, it’s better to pay extra to have it registered or send it by courier.
DHL (www.dhl.com) is the most reliable courier company with
international service.
Parcels
To mail an international parcel in La Paz, take it downstairs in the central
post office (the stairs are halfway along the ground floor and to the right).
You may be charged a small fee to have the belongings wrapped or your
box officially labeled. You’ll need two copies of your passport – one will be
in- cluded in your package. Complete the necessary forms (at the time of
research these included a customs declaration form and a list of contents,
known as a CN-23: Declaración de Aduana and CP-71 Boletín de
Expedición). Take your parcel to the office marked ‘Encomiendas.’ If your
package is less than 2kg, it’s easier to send by regular mail. Pay the cost of
postage and complete the CN-23. A 1kg parcel to the US will cost about
B$150 by air and B$238 by faster courier service.
In some cities, you might have your parcels checked by customs at the
post office; in cities without inhouse customs agents, you may have to trek
across town to the aduana (customs office). A parcel’s chances of arriving
at its destination are inversely proportional to its declared value, and to the
number of ‘inspections’ to which it is subjected.
Postal Rates
Airmail postales (postcards) or letters weighing up to 20g cost about
B$7.50 to the US, B$9 to Europe and B$10.50 to the rest of the world.
Relatively reliable express-mail service is available for rates similar to
those charged by private international couriers.
Receiving Mail
Reliable, free lista de correos (poste restante) is available in larger cities.
Mail should be addressed to you, c/o Lista de Correos (Poste Restante),
Correo Central, La Paz (or whatever city), Bolivia. Using only a first initial
and capitalizing your entire last name will help avoid confusion. Mail is
often sorted into foreign and Bolivian stacks, so those with Latin surnames
should check the local stack as well as checking for your first name. La Paz
holds poste restante for two months. You will need your passport to collect
the mail.
Public Holidays
Public holidays vary from province to province. The following is a list of
the main national and provincial public holidays; for precise dates (which
vary from year to year), check locally.
Nuevo Año (New Year’s Day) January 1
Carnaval February/March
Semana Santa (Easter Week) March/April
Día del Trabajo (Labor Day) May 1
Corpus Christi May/June
Día de la Independencia (Independence Day) August 6
Día de Colón (Columbus Day) October 12
Día de los Muertos (All Souls’ Day) November 2
Navidad (Christmas) December 25
Departmental Holidays
Not about to be outdone by their neighbors, each department has its own
holiday.
Beni November 18
Chuquisaca May 25
Cochabamba September 14
La Paz July 16
Oruro February 10
Pando September 24
Potosí November 10
Santa Cruz September 24
Tarija April 15
Safe Travel
Crime against tourists is on the increase in Bolivia, especially in La Paz
and, to a lesser extent, Cochabamba, Copacabana and Oruro. Scams are
commonplace, and fake police, false tourist police and ‘helpful’ tourists are
on the rise. Be aware, too, of circulating counterfeit banknotes.
There is a strong tradition of social protest in Bolivia: with more than
1000 ongoing conflicts, demonstrations are a regular occurrence and this
can affect travelers. While generally peaceful, they can turn threatening in
nature at times: agitated protesters throw stones and rocks and police
occasionally use force and tear gas to disperse crowds. Bloqueos
(roadblocks) and strikes by transportation workers often lead to long delays.
Be careful if using taxis during transportation strikes – you may end up at
the receiving end of a rock, which people pelt at those who are not in
sympathy with them.
The rainy season means flooding, landslides and road washouts, which in
turn means more delays. Getting stuck overnight behind a landslide can
happen; you’ll be a happier camper with ample food, drink and warm
clothes on hand.
Note that the mine tours in Potosí, bike trips outside La Paz and the 4WD
excursions around Salar de Uyuni have become so popular that agencies are
willing to forgo safety. Make sure you do your research before signing up
for the tour.
GOVERNMENT TRAVEL ADVICE
The following government websites offer travel advis- ories and information on current hot
spots:
Australian Department of Foreign Affairs (www.smartraveller.gov.au)
British Foreign Office (www.fco.gov.uk)
Canadian Department of Foreign Affairs (www.dfait-maeci.gc.ca)
US State Department (www.travel.state.gov)
Shopping
Each town or region has its own specialty artesanía (locally handcrafted
items). For traditional musical instruments, head for Tarija or Calle
Sagárnaga in La Paz (although the latter will be overpriced). For weavings,
the Cordillera Apolobamba or the environs of Sucre are your best bet.
Ceramics are a specialty around Cochabamba, and crafts in tropical woods
are sold in the lowlands around Santa Cruz, Trinidad and the Amazon
Basin.
You’ll find a range of reasonably priced artwork from all over the
country in La Paz and Copacabana, but prices are generally lower at the
point of original production. All sorts of clothing are available in llama and
alpaca wool; vicuña wool is the finest and most expensive. Some pieces are
hand-dyed and woven or knitted while others are mass-produced by
machine.
Many articles are made by cooperatives or profit companies with
ecofriendly and culturally responsible practices.
Solo Travelers
As always when traveling, safety is in numbers; solo travelers should
remain alert when traveling, especially at night. On the whole, however, the
benefits of solo travel can be huge, as being alone often opens up many
doors to meeting local people as well as other travelers.
On the well-trodden gringo circuit, solo travelers should have little
trouble meeting up with others. Some hostels and hotels have notice boards
for those wanting to form groups to do activ- ities. In places like Uyuni it’s
relatively easy to meet other travelers around town to make up the numbers
needed for excursions.
Hostel prices are often based on a per-person rate, although more
upmarket hotels have separate prices for single and double, with the latter
being more economical.
The recent increase in tourism to Bolivia has meant that locals are
becoming more accustomed to seeing Western travelers, including
unaccompanied women. This has significantly reduced the incidence of
sexual harassment and the concept of the ‘loose gringa,’ but in some places
you may still face unwanted attention.
If you are traveling without a male companion and/or alone, it’s wise to
avoid testosterone-filled domains such as bars, sports matches, mines and
construction sites. It’s generally safe to catch a lift on a camión (flatbed
truck) if you see lots of other people waiting; don’t get on board if anything
seems fishy. Women should never hitchhike alone. Especially in urban areas
and at night, women – even in groups – should be careful, and avoid
isolation. Hiking alone is discouraged under any circumstances.
Telephone
Numerous carriers – such as Entel, Viva, Boliviatel, Cotel and Tigo – offer
local and long-distance rates on both landlines and cellular phones.
Bolivia’s first company, Empresa Nacional de Telecomunicaciones (Entel),
is still the most prevalent in smaller towns but other companies are making
an entrance. Local calls cost just a few bolivianos from these offices.
Puntos, run by all of the above companies, are small, privately run outposts
offering similar services and are open late. Alternatively, street kiosks are
often equipped with telephones that charge B$1 for brief local calls.
In some tiny villages you’ll find card-phone telephone boxes – phones
take both magnetic and computer chip varieties. Both card types (tarjetas)
come in denominations of B$10, B$20, B$50 and B$100. Touts in
fluorescent jackets with cellular phones chained to themselves offer calls
for B$1 per minute.
Cellular SIM cards are cheap (starting at B$40, inclusive of B$20 to
B$30 credit) and available from larger carrier outlets as well as small
private phone shops. If you buy from a private outlet, activate the number
and check that the phone works before purchasing. Make sure your phone
has tri-band network capabilities (similar to the US system). To top up your
call amount, buy cards (ask for crédito, ie credit) from the numerous puntos
in any city or town.
DIALING IN TO THE TELEPHONE
NETWORK
Even Bolivians struggle with their own telephone network. Here’s a quick kit to get you dialing.
Numbers Líneas fijas (landlines) have seven digits; cellular numbers have eight digits.
Numerous telecommunications carriers include, among others, Entel, Cotel, Tigo, Bolivia- tel
and Viva. Each carrier has an individual code between 010 and 021.
Area codes Each department (region) has its own single-digit area code, which must be used
when dialing from another region or to another city, regardless of whether it’s the same area
code as the one you’re in. The department codes are: 2 La Paz, Oruro, Potosí; 3 Santa
Cruz, Beni, Pando; 4 Cochabamba, Chuquisaca, Tarija.
Public phones Dialing landlines from public phone booths is easy; ask the cashier for advice.
Placing calls To make a call to another landline within the same city, simply dial the seven-digit
number. If you’re calling another region, dial 0 plus the single-digit area code followed by
the seven-digit number, eg 02-123-4567. If calling a cell phone, ask the cashier for
instructions; most puntos have different phones for calls to cellulars and landlines, so you may
have to swap cabins if calling both.
Cellular phones Cellular-to-cellular calls within the same city are simple – just dial the eightdigit number. A recorded message (in Spanish) may prompt you for a carrier number, indicating
that the person is either not within the same city or region or has a SIM card from another
region, in which case you must then redial using a 0 plus the two-digit carrier number plus
the eight-digit cellular number. For cellular-to-landline calls within the same city, in most cases,
you must dial the single-digit area code, and then the seven-digit number. For cellular-tolandline calls to another region, in most cases, you must dial a 0 plus the two-digit carrier
code, followed by the single-digit area code, and then the seven-digit number. For example, if
dialing Sucre from La Paz, dial 0 then 10 (or any one of the carrier codes – 10 is
Entel’s network carrier) then 4 (Sucre’s area code) then the seven-digit number.
International calls For international calls, you must first dial 00 followed by a country
code, area code (without the first zero) and the telephone number.
Phone Codes
In this book, when the given phone number is in another city or town (eg
some rural hotels have La Paz reservation numbers), the single-digit
telephone code is provided along with the number.
International Calls
Bolivia’s country code is 591. The international direct-dialing access
code is 00. Calls from telephone offices are getting cheaper all the time,
especially now that there’s competition between the carriers – they can vary
between B$1.50 and B$8 per minute.
In La Paz the cheapest of cheap calls can be made from international
calling centers around Calle Sagárnaga for about B$2 per minute.
Some Entel offices accept reverse-charge (collect) calls; others will give
you the office’s number and let you be called back. For reverse-charge calls
from a private line, ring an international operator: for the US ( 800-10-
1110, 800-10-2222), Canada ( 800-10-0101) or UK ( 800-10-0044) be
aware that these calls can be bank-breakers.
Internet Calls
Most internet places have Skype installed, which you can use at no extra
cost – you just have to pay for the time online.
Time
Bolivian time is four hours behind Greenwich Mean Time (GMT), and an
hour ahead of the US Eastern Standard Time. When it’s noon in La Paz, it’s
4pm in London, 11am in New York, 8am in San Francisco, 4am the
following day in Auckland and 2am the following day in Sydney.
Toilets
Toilet humor becomes the norm in Bolivia. First and foremost, you’ll have
to learn to live with the fact that facilities are nonexistent on nearly all
buses (except for a few of the luxury ones). Smelly, poorly maintained
baños públicos (public toilets) abound and charge about B$1 in populated
areas and B$5 in the wilderness, such as around the Salar de Uyuni. Carry
toilet paper with you wherever you go, at all times! Toilet paper isn’t
flushed down any Bolivian toilet – use the wastebaskets provided. In an
emergency, you can always follow the locals’ lead and drop your drawers
whenever and wherever you feel the need. Some of the most popular spots
seem to be below ‘ No Orinar’ (Don’t Urinate) signs threatening multas
(fines) equal to the average Bolivian monthly wage. Use the facilities at
your hotel before heading out.
Tourist Information
Despite the fact that tourism has taken off in recent years, the Bolivian
tourist industry is still in its formative stages, and government tourist offices still concentrate more on statistics and bureaucratic spending than on
promotion of the country’s attractions or imposing safety regulations. Most
real development and promotion has been courtesy of the private sector,
which is the chief source of brochures and promotional programs.
There are often offices covering the prefectura (department) and alcaldía
(local municipality) of a particular city. The major cities, such as Santa Cruz
and La Paz, have offices for both, although the different tourism bodies
range from helpful to useless, often flying under the new InfoTur banner.
Most municipal offices can provide street plans and answer specific
questions about local transportation and attractions. The most worthwhile
are those in La Paz, Santa Cruz and Oruro, while those in other major cities
seem to be considerably less useful. Note that the posted opening hours are
not always followed. There are no tourist offices abroad. Servicio Nacional
de Áreas Protegidas (SERNAP) is the best source of information about
Bolivia’s national parks.
Travelers with Disabilities
The sad fact is that Bolivia’s infrastructure is ill-equipped for travelers with
disabilities. You will, however, see locals overcoming myriad obstacles and
challenges while making their daily rounds. If you encounter difficulties
yourself, you’ll likely find locals willing to go out of their way to lend a
hand. For general information, visit the Global Access – Disabled Travel
Network (www.globalaccessnews.com).
Visas
Passports must be valid for six months beyond the date of entry. Entry or
exit stamps are supposed to be free, but in remote border areas you will
often be charged anywhere from B$15 to B$30 for an exit stamp. Personal
documents – passports and visas – must be carried at all times, especially in
lowland regions. It’s safest to carry photocopies rather than originals.
Bolivian visa requirements can be arbitrarily changed and interpreted.
Regulations, including entry stays, are likely to change. Each Bolivian
consulate and border crossing may have its own entry procedures and
idiosyncrasies.
In 2007, as an act of reciprocity, the Morales government introduced
visas for US citizens visiting Bolivia (a 90-day visa valid for five years
costs US$135). At the time of writing, it was possible to obtain the visa
upon arrival in Bolivia; check with the Bolivian embassy ( 202-483-
4410; www.bolivia-usa.org) before traveling.
Citizens of most South American and Western European countries can
get a tourist card on entry for stays up to 90 days (depending on the
nationality). Citizens of Canada, Australia, New Zealand and Japan are
granted 30 days, while citizens of Israel are granted 90 days. This is subject
to change; always check with your consulate prior to entry. If you want to
stay longer, you have to extend your tourist card (this is accomplished at the
immigration office in any major city with a letter requesting the extension;
it’s free for some nationalities – for others, it costs B$198 per 30-day
extension). The maximum time travelers are permitted to stay in the country
is 180 days in one year. Alternatively, you can apply for a visa. Visas are
issued by Bolivian consular representatives, including those in neighboring
South American countries. Brazilian visas can be complicated, so check
ahead. Costs vary according to the consulate and the nationality of the
applicant, but hover around B$2500.
Overstayers can be fined B$14 per day (or more, depending on the
nationality) – payable at the immigration office or airport – and may face
ribbons of red tape at the border or airport when leaving the country.
In addition to a valid passport and visa, citizens of many Communist,
African, Middle Eastern and Asian countries require ‘official permission’
from the Bolivian Ministry of Foreign Affairs before a visa will be issued.
More up-to-date visa information can be found at www.lonelyplanet.com.
Vaccination Certificates
Border agents may or may not request a yellow-fever vaccination
certificate, and there are occasional checkpoints heading into the lowlands,
where you will need to produce a certificate. Many neighboring countries,
including Brazil, require anyone entering from Bolivia to have proof of a
yellow-fever vaccination. If necessary, a jab can often be administered at
the border but it is preferable to take care of this at home.
Volunteering
There are hundreds of voluntary and nongovernmental organizations
(NGOs) working in Bolivia, making this a popular spot to volunteer. Many
of the opportunities included here follow the pay-to-volunteer model, and
often include room and board, costing anywhere from US$200 to US$1000
per month.
Be aware that some profit organizations offer ‘internship’ or ‘volunteer’
opportunities, when in reality it’s unpaid work in exchange for free trips or
activities.
There are a few options to do genuine volunteer work. Governmentsponsored organizations or NGOs offer longer-term programs (usually two
years) for which you receive an allowance, pre-departure briefings and
ongoing organizational support; church-affiliated or religious organizations
offer short-term opportunities, often on a group basis; and smaller volunteer
organizations (often profit-based) offer independent travelers the
opportunity to work on community projects. These usually have a two- or
four-week minimum for which you pay.
Volunteer Organizations
Animales S.O.S ( 2-230-8080; www.animalessos.org; Av Chacaltaya
1759, La Paz) An animal-welfare group caring for mistreated or abused
stray animals.
Parque Machía ( 4-413-6572; www.intiwarayassi.org; Villa Tunari,
Chapare) Volunteer-run wild-animal refuge; previous experience of
working with animals is needed, and the minimum commitment is 15 days.
Senda Verde ( 7472-2825; www.sendaverde.com; Yolosa) Just outside
Coroico, this wildlife refuge has a two-week volunteer program.
Sustainable Bolivia ( 4-423-3786; www.sustainablebolivia.org; Julio
Arauco Prado 230, Cochabamba) Cochabamba-based nonprofit
organization with a variety of volunteering programs, both short- and longterm, through 22 local organizations.
Volunteer Bolivia Offline map Google map ( 4-452-6028;
www.volunteerbolivia.org; Ecuador 0342, Cochabamba) Arranges shortand long-term volunteer work, study and homestay programs throughout
Bolivia.
WWOOOF Latin America (www.wwooflatinamerica.com) Sets you up
with volunteer opportunities on organic farms.
International Programs
Amizade (www.amizade.org)
Bridge Abroad (www.volunteeradventures.com)
Earthwatch Institute (www.earthwatch.org)
Global Crossroad (www.globalcrossroad.com)
GoAbroad.com (www.volunteerabroad.com)
GVI (www.gvi.co.uk)
i-to-i (www.i-to-i.com)
Projects Abroad (www.projects-abroad.co.uk)
Real Gap (www.realgap.co.uk)
UN Volunteers (www.unv.org)
Wayna Hilaña Yanapaña (W.H.Y) (www.whybolivia.org)
World Volunteer Web (www.worldvolunteerweb.org)
Women Travelers
Women’s rights in Bolivia are nearing modern standards, and cities are
more liberal than country regions. But despite the importance of women in
Bolivian society and the elevation of females in public life (including a
female ex-president and women mayors), the machismo mindset still
pervades Bolivia. In the home women rule, while external affairs are largely
managed by men. As a female traveling alone, the mere fact that you appear
to be unmarried and far from your home and family may cause you to
appear suspiciously disreputable.
Bear in mind that modesty is expected of women in much of Spanishspeaking Latin America. Local women who wear Western dress in the
warmer and lower areas tend to show more flesh than elsewhere in the
country. That said, as a foreigner, avoid testing the system alone in a bar
wearing a miniskirt. Conservative dress and confidence without arrogance
are a must for gringas, more to be respectful than anything else. Men are
generally more forward and flirtatious in the lowlands, where the Latino
culture is more prevalent, than in the Altiplano where indigenous cultures
prevail. The best advice is to watch the standards of well-dressed Bolivian
women in any particular area and follow their example.
As a safety measure for a woman traveler, try to avoid arriving at a place
at night. If you need to take a taxi at night, it’s preferable to call for a radio
taxi than to flag one down in the street. Note that during the period leading
up to Carnaval and during the festivities, a woman traveling solo can be a
popular target for water bombs, which can feel like quite a harassment or at
least an annoyance.
Women should avoid hiking alone, and should never walk alone at night.
Work
For paid work, qualified English teachers can try the professionally run
Centro Boliviano-Americano Offline map Google map (CBA; Click here ;
2-243-0107; www.cba.edu.bo; Parque Zenón Iturralde 121) in La Paz;
there are also offices in other cities. New, unqualified teachers must forfeit
two months’ salary in return for their training. Better paying are private
school positions teaching math, science or social studies. Accredited
teachers can expect to earn up to US$500 per month for a full-time position.
Other travelers find work in gringo bars, hostels or with tour operators.
Keep in mind that you are likely taking the job from a Bolivian by doing
this.
Top of section
Transportation
GETTING THERE & AWAY
A landlocked country, Bolivia has numerous entry/exit points, and you can
get here by boat, bus, train, plane, bike and on foot. Some places are easier
to travel through and more accessible than others.
Flights, cars and tours can be booked online at www.lonelyplanet.com.
Entering the Country
If you have your documents in order and are willing to answer a few
questions about the aim of your visit, entering Bolivia should be a breeze. If
crossing at a small border post, you may be asked to pay an ‘exit fee.’
Unless other- wise noted in the text, such fees are strictly unofficial.
Note that Bolivian border times can be unreliable at best and you should
always check with a migración (immigration) office in the nearest major
town. If you plan to cross the border outside the stated hours, or at a point
where there is no border post, you can usually obtain an exit/entry stamp
from the nearest migración office on departure or arrival.
Air
Only a few US and European airlines offer direct flights to Bolivia, so
airfares are high. There are direct services to most major South American
cities and the flights to/from Chile and Peru are the cheapest. Santa Cruz is
an increasingly popular entry point from Western European hubs. Due to
altitude-related costs, it is more expensive to fly into La Paz than Santa
Cruz. High season for most fares is from early June to late August, and
from mid-December to mid-February.
Airports & Airlines
Bolivia’s principal international airports are La Paz’ El Alto International
Airport (LPB), formerly known as John F Kennedy Memorial, and Santa
Cruz’ Viru-Viru International (VVI).
The bigger airlines operate international flights and have offices in La
Paz.
Aerolíneas Argentinas (AR; 3-333-9776; www.aerolineas.com.ar)
Amaszonas ( 2-222-0848; www.amaszonas.com)
American Airlines (AA; 2-334-1314; www.aa.com)
BOA ( 901-105-010; www.boa.bo) This is the new national airline, but at
the time of writing its service was still irregular.
Grupo Taca (TA; 800-10-8222; www.taca.com)
LAN Airlines (LA; 800-100-521; www.lan.com)
TAM (PZ; 2-244-3442; www.tam.com.br)
Tickets
Ticket prices in this chapter do not include taxes or fuel levies, which can
significantly increase air travel costs. Save money by using online
aggregators and deal sites or make a cost-saving flight/land connection via
Lima, Cuzco, Santiago or Buenos Aires.
ROUND-THE-WORLD TICKETS
Round-the-world (RTW) tickets can be real bargains if you are traveling to
South America from the other side of the world. Generally put together by
airline alliances, RTW tickets allow you a limited period (usually a year) in
which to circum- navigate the globe.
An alternative to a RTW ticket is one put together by a travel agent.
These tickets are more expensive than airline RTW fares, but you get to
choose your itinerary.
Travel agents can also combine tickets from two low-cost airlines to offer
multidestination fares that are cheaper than a RTW ticket and allow for two
stops on the way to and from South America.
Some online sites offer intercontinental tickets.
Oneworld (www.oneworld.com) An airline alliance.
Round the World Flights (www.roundtheworldflights.com) An excellent
site that allows you to build your own trip from the UK.
Star Alliance (www.staralliance.com) An airline alliance.
STA Travel (www.statravel.com) Student travel.
DEPARTURE TAX
Departure taxes vary according to the airport and destin- ation. All are payable at the airport
(either at the counter or a separate window) and are not included in ticket prices. Domestic
departure taxes range from B$11 to B$15. International departure tax is US$25. Some airports
also levy a municipal tax of up to B$7.
Australia & New Zealand
Travel between Australasia and South America isn’t cheap, so it makes
sense to consider a RTW ticket or travel via Buenos Aires or Santiago.
Round-trip fares from Sydney to La Paz via Auckland and Santiago start at
about A$2500/3000 return in low/high season. Fares via the US are
considerably more expensive, starting at about A$3200 return in low
season. RTW tickets including La Paz start at about A$3300. The most
direct routes are from Sydney to Santiago on LAN/Qantas, or to Buenos
Aires with Qantas/LAN and Aerolíneas Argentinas.
Destination Holidays ( 03-9725-4655; www.south-america.com.au)
and South American Travel Centre ( 03-9642-5353; www.satc.com.au)
specialize in Latin American travel.
Continental Europe
The best places in Europe for cheap airfares are student travel agencies (you
don’t have to be a student to use them) and online aggregators.
Some fares include a stopover in the US. Note that passengers traveling
through New York (JFK) or Miami must pass through American
immigration procedures, even if they aren’t visiting the US. That means
you’ll either need to have a US visa or be eligible for the Visa Waiver
Program, which is open to Australians, New Zealanders and most Western
Europeans unless they’re traveling on a non-accredited airline (which
include most Latin American airlines).
By the time you read this, BOA’s planned daily service from La Paz to
Madrid should be up and running.
South America
BOA connects La Paz to São Paolo and Buenos Aires several times a week.
Aero- líneas Argentinas flies daily between Santa Cruz and Buenos Aires,
and Varig-Gol Airlines flies between Santa Cruz and Rio de Janeiro (among
other destinations). At the time of writing, Amaszonas was planning a daily
service between Cuzco and La Paz.
LanChile connects La Paz with Santiago daily and there are connecting
flights to Iquique. Brazilian-owned TAM connects Asuncíon with Santa
Cruz. LanPeru flies from La Paz to Cuzco (often via Lima) daily.
UK
From London, all flights go via the US or South American countries. Save
money by booking online or with a RTW ticket. Expect to pay from about
£400 one-way in the low season. RTW tickets from London that take in
South America (Santiago and Rio de Janeiro) start from about £1400.
London-based South American specialists include Journey Latin
America (JLA; 020-3468-1460; www.journeylatinamerica.co.uk) and
Western & Oriental ( 020-7666-1260; www.wandotravel.com).
US & Canada
Tickets from North American gateways usually have restrictions – often a
two-week advance-purchase requirement, and you must usually stay at least
one week and no longer than three months (prices can double for longer
periods). Miami departures are the cheapest options.
Save money online and through deal-watcher or price-alerts sites such as
www.travelzoo.com, www.groupon.com or www.kayak.com. Look for
agencies that specialize in South America, such as eXito ( 800-655-4053;
www.exitotravel.com).
Most flights from Canada involve connecting via a US gateway such as
Miami or Los Angeles.
Land & River
Border Crossings
ARGENTINA
Two major overland crossings between Argentina and Bolivia are
Villazón/La Quiaca (open 7am to 11pm) and Yacuiba/Pocitos (7am to
4pm). Villazón is connected by train with Oruro or Tupiza. The
Yacuiba/Pocitos crossing is 5km from Yacuiba, in the Chaco region. Buses
traveling further into Argentina leave every couple of hours.
The minor border crossing at Bermejo/Agua Blanca (8am to 5pm) south
of Tarija is at an international bridge that leads onto a highway going
further into Argentina.
BRAZIL
Note that proof of yellow-fever vaccination is needed when crossing into
Brazil. If you don’t have one, you can get a shot at the border (in relatively
sanitary conditions).
Bolivia can be accessed via the Quijarro/Corumbá crossing.
Frequent motorboats (B$10) provide a novel water entry/exit via Río
Mamoré at Guayaramerín/Guajará-Mirim (8am to 8pm). There are no
restrictions when entering Guajará-Mirim for a quick visit, but if you intend
to travel further into Brazil, you must pick up an entry/exit stamp. For
departure stamps from Bolivia, head to the Polícia Federal in Bolivian
immigration ( 8am-8pm) by the dock.
Alternative ferry options are becoming less common, but can provide
short hops across borders in the Amazon Basin at far-flung locales such as
Parque Nacional Noel Kempff Mercado and Pimienteras in Bolivia, and
Cobija and Brasiléia in Brazil.
CHILE
Note that meat, fruit and food produce (including coca leaves) cannot be
taken from Bolivia into Chile and will be confiscated at the border.
The most popular route between Chile and Bolivia is by bus from La Paz
to Arica through the border at Chungará/Tambo Quemado (8am to 8pm).
A convenient alternative for those doing the 4WD Southwest Circuit tour is
to be dropped off on the last day at Hito Cajón (8am to 11pm, although it’s
wise to be there before 6pm) and head for San Pedro, Chile (many tour
operators now offer transfers). From here, you can pick up a bus. Note the
one-hour trip between the Bolivian border and San Pedro – it’s better to
arrange transport for this in advance, in case taxis aren’t waiting.
Alternatively, there is a less used road between Oruro and Iquique with a
border at Pisiga/Colchane (8am to 8pm).
A crossing can be made by train or road from Uyuni to Calama, where
the border crossing is Ollagüe / Avaroa (8am to 8pm).
PARAGUAY
The easiest route between Paraguay and Bolivia is to cross from Pedro Juan
Caballero (in Asunción, Paraguay) to Ponta Porã (Brazil), and then travel
by bus or train to Corumbá (Brazil) and Quijarro (Bolivia).
The trans-Chaco bus trip between Santa Cruz in Bolivia and Asunción in
Paraguay is a daily service. This is a notorious smuggling route, so expect
to be lined up with your bags while customs officials and sniffer dogs rifle
through your possessions.
For the adventurous, traveling by river between Asunción and Bolivia
(via Corumbá, Brazil) is likely to involve a series of short journeys and
informal arrangements with individual boat captains. From Asunción,
there’s an irregular river ser- vice to Concepción (Paraguay), and beyond
here is where the informal boat arrangements begin. You’ll probably wind
up doing it in two stages: from Concepción to Bahía Negra (northern
Paraguay), and Bahía Negra to Corumbá.
PERU
Bolivia is normally reached overland from Peru via Lake Titicaca. If you
have time, the border crossing at Kasani/Yunguyo (8am to 6pm) via
Copacabana is more appealing than the faster, less secure and least
interesting one at Desaguadero (9am to 9pm).
If departing Bolivia directly from La Paz, it’s easiest to catch an agency
bus to Puno (Peru); the bus stops in Copa- cabana and for immigration
formalities in Yunguyo. A similar service goes direct to Cuzco. A cheaper
way from Copacabana is by minibus from Plaza Sucre to the
Kasani/Yunguyo border, with onward transportation to the border at
Yunguyo (five mi- nutes) and to Puno.
Bus
Depending on which country you enter from, some intercountry buses
booked through an agency might cover your entire route; at other times
you’ll switch to an associated bus company once you cross the border. If
traveling by local bus, you’ll usually need to catch onward buses once
you’ve made your border crossing. Bolivia en tus Manos
(www.boliviaentusmanos.com/terminal) provides online bus schedules from
major cities, including Cochabamba, La Paz, Potosí and Sucre.
Car & Motorcycle
You can enter Bolivia by road from any of the neighboring countries. The
route from Brazil is improving but can still be a little rough, and roads from
Paraguay should be considered only if driving a 4WD. The routes from
Argentina, Chile and Peru pose no significant problems.
CLIMATE CHANGE & TRAVEL
Every form of transport that relies on carbon-based fuel generates CO2, the main cause of
human-induced climate change. Modern travel is dependent on aeroplanes, which might use less
fuel per kilometre per person than most cars but travel much greater distances. The altitude at
which aircraft emit gases (including CO2) and particles also contributes to their climate change
impact. Many websites offer ‘carbon calculators’ that allow people to estimate the carbon
emissions generated by their journey and, for those who wish to do so, to offset the impact of
the greenhouse gases emitted with contributions to portfolios of climate-friendly initiatives
throughout the world. Lonely Planet offsets the carbon footprint of all staff and author travel.
Foreigners entering Bolivia from another country need the hoja de ruta
(circulation card), available from the Servicio Nacional de Tránsito/Aduana
at the border. This document must be presented and stamped at all police
posts – variously known as trancas, tránsitos or controles – which are sited
along highways and just outside major cities. Peajes (tolls) are often
charged at these checkpoints, and vehicles may be searched for contraband.
GETTING AROUND
Bolivian roads are getting better, with several new paved routes popping up
in recent years. Air transit is also easier, and slightly more cost- effective
and prevalent, especially in the lowlands. Most of Bolivia is covered by
small bus, boat, train and airline companies. It still takes a while to get
around, and roads blocked by protesters, construction or landslides are
common, as are flooded roads, and rivers with too little water to traverse.
TOP TIPS FOR GETTING AROUND
Air
Save time Flights will save you days of travel, but can add to your overall budget. In the
Amazon, flying is now much preferred to boat travel.
Cancellations are common Call ahead to make sure you are still booked. You may need to wait
until the next day, and if not you may be able to get a 70% refund.
Carry heavy stuff Weight limits are often 15kg for checked bags.
Save money Book online or with the airline office.
Boat
Less common Boat services are less common in the lowlands than they used to be. Adventurous
spirits will find unique experiences if they are willing to seek services out.
Protect valuables Keep them padlocked.
Keep comfortable Bring a hammock, book and mosquito repellent.
Bus
Go direct Direct cama (reclining seat), semi- cama (partially reclining seat) and tourist-class
services cost more but can save several hours.
Safeguard valuables Keep them with you on the bus (not in the overhead bin). You should
padlock your bag if it’s going on top.
Stay warm Bring warm clothes and even a sleeping bag if going anywhere in the Altiplano.
Roadside vendors offer snacks along the way, but bring some just in case, as well as some water.
Times may change Expect transit times to vary by up to three hours. Getting stranded overnight
is not hugely uncommon.
Stay safe If your driver is drunk, don’t get on, or get down. Accidents caused by drunk bus
drivers are all too common in Bolivia. Daytime driving is the safest.
Car & Motorcycle
Speak Spanish Only drive or ride if you speak Spanish moderately well.
Expect delays There might be speed traps, potholes and closures on the road.
Supplies Bring a GPS, a good map, extra food and water, sleeping bag, clothes.
Don’t drive at night Stick to daytime travel.
Train
Expect delays Timetables are more like guidelines than strict schedules.
Plan for comfort Bring snacks, games and sleeping bags.
Watch out Pickpockets and bag snatchers often operate at stops.
Air
Air travel within Bolivia is inexpensive and the quickest and most reliable
way to reach out-of-the-way places. It’s also the only means of transportation that isn’t washed out during the wet season. When weather-related
disruptions occur, planes eventually get through, even during summer
flooding in northern Bolivia. Schedules tend to change frequently and
cancellations are frequent, so plan ahead.
Airlines in Bolivia
The closure of two large Bolivian carriers, Lloyd Aéro Boliviano and
AeroSur, has left a gap in national air services. There is now a new national
airline, BOA ( 901-105-010; www.boa.bo). Transporte Aéreos Militares
(TAM; Click here ; 2-268-1111; www.tam.bo; Ismael Montes 738, Prado,
La Paz) also offers flights around the country.
AeroCon ( 901-105-252; www.aerocon.bo) Connects the country’s major
cities, as well as some more remote corners.
Amaszonas ( 2-222-0848; www.amaszonas.com) Small planes fly from
La Paz to Uyuni, Rurrenabaque, Trinidad, Santa Cruz and other lowland
destinations. By now, a planned service to Cuzco should be operating.
Bicycle
For cyclists who can cope with the challenges of cold winds, poor road
conditions, high altitudes and steep terrain, Bolivia is a paradise. With the
number of dirt roads, mountain bikes are common. While traffic isn’t a
serious problem (though cliffs are), intimidating buses and camiones
(flatbed trucks) can leave cyclists in clouds of dust or embedded in mud.
Finding supplies may prove difficult, so cyclists in remote areas must carry
ample food and water. Given these challenges, many prefer to leave the
work to a tour company.
If you’re considering any biking in Bolivia, make sure you purchase a
comprehensive travel insurance policy.
Bolivia has its fair share of inexpensive bikes, mostly supermarket
beaters from China. Quality new wheels are rarer. Your best bet for buying
a used, touring-worthy stead is through agencies in La Paz. Try Gravity
Assisted Mountain Biking ( 2-231-3849; www.gravitybolivia.com; 16 de
Julio 1490 No 10, Edificio Avenida, Prado, La Paz) for spare parts and help
with repairs. Bringing your own bicycle into the country is generally hasslefree.
Boat
Ferry
The only public ferry service in Bolivia operates between San Pedro and
San Pablo, across the narrow Estrecho de Tiquina (Straits of Tiquina) on
Lake Titicaca. You can travel by launch or rowboat to any of Lake
Titicaca’s Bolivian islands. Boats and tours are available from Huatajata to
the Huyñaymarka islands in the lake’s southernmost extension.
To visit Isla del Sol, you can take a tour, hire a launch or catch a
scheduled service from Copacabana, or look for a lift in Yampupata or the
villages along the way. A couple of well-established tour companies
provide cruises by motorboat or hydrofoil. Book your trips from
Copacabana Beach or from Huatajata.
River Boat
There’s no scheduled passenger service on the Amazon, so travelers almost
invariably wind up on some sort of cargo vessel. The most popular routes
are from Puerto Villa- rroel to Trinidad, and Trinidad to Guayaramerín.
There are also much less frequented routes from Rurrenabaque or Puerto
Heath to Riberalta, but these are increasingly hard to arrange.
Bus
Bus travel is cheap and relatively safe in Bolivia, but can also be quite
uncomfortable and nerve-racking at times. Buses are the country’s most
popular type of transport, and come in various forms. Long-distance bus
services are called flotas, large buses are known as buses, three-quarter
(usually older) ones are called micros, and minibuses are just that.
If looking for a bus terminal, ask for la terminal terrestre or la terminal
de buses. Each terminal charges a small fee (a couple of bolivianos), which
you pay to an agent upon boarding or when purchasing a ticket at the
counter.
There have been numerous reports of items disappearing from buses’
internal overhead compartments. Hold on tight to your daypacks and bags if
they are with you in the bus. Backpacks and bags are generally safe when
stored in the baggage compartment, but try to watch as your luggage is
loaded – there have been instances of bags becoming ‘lost’ or
‘disappeared.’ You will be given a baggage tag, which you must show when
reclaiming your bag. A lock is a good idea.
Except on the most popular runs, most companies’ buses depart at
roughly the same time, regardless of how many companies are competing
for the same business. Between any two cities, you should have no trouble
finding at least one daily bus. On the most popular routes, you can choose
between dozens of daily departures.
It’s always a good idea to check the vehicles of several companies before
purchasing your ticket. Some buses are ramshackle affairs with broken
windows, cracked windshields and worn tires; it’s better to stay away from
these and look for a better vehicle, even if it means paying a little more.
Don’t try to save on safety.
Classes & Costs
The only choices you’ll have to make are on major, long-haul routes, where
the better companies offer coche (or ‘ bus’), semi-cama (half-sleeper, with
seats that recline a long way and footrests) and cama (sleeper) services. The
cost can double for sleeper service, but could be worth it. Tourist buses to
major destinations like Copacabana and Uyuni are twice the price of
standard buses, but are safer and more comfortable. The VCR on the newest
buses will be in better shape than the reclining seats (expect Van Damme all
night), heaters may function, snacks may be served and toilets (yes, toilets)
may work.
Prices vary according to the different standard of bus (from the more
luxurious bus cama service to the ancient Bluebird-style buses) and the
length of trip (whether overnight or short day-hop).
Reservations
To be certain, reserve bus tickets at least several hours in advance. Many
buses depart in the afternoon or evening and arrive at their destination in the
small hours of the morning. On most major routes there are also daytime
departures. Bolivia en tus Manos (www.boliviaentusmanos.com/terminal)
has online bus schedules for departures from major cities, including
Cochabamba, La Paz, Potosí and Sucre.
Car & Motorcycle
The advantages of a private vehicle are flexibility, access to remote areas
and the chance to seize photo opportunities. More Bolivian roads are being
paved (most recently, between La Paz and Potosí), but others are in varying
stages of decay, making high-speed travel impossible (unless you’re a
Bolivian bus driver) and inadvisable.
The undaunted should prepare their expeditions carefully. Bear in mind
that spare parts are a rare commodity outside cities. A high-clearance 4WD
vehicle is essential for off-road travel. You’ll need tools, spare tires, a
puncture repair kit, extra gas and fluids, and as many spare parts as
possible. For emergencies, carry camping equipment and plenty of rations.
You’ll also need to purchase a good travel insurance policy back home
(check with your credit card to see if it covers rental insurance in Bolivia).
Low-grade (85-octane) gasoline and diesel fuel is available at surtidores
(gas stations) in all cities and major towns. Gas costs about B$3.74 per liter,
and more in remote areas. Expect some lines.
In lowland areas where temperatures are high and roads are scarce,
motorbikes are popular for zipping around the plazas, as well as to explore
areas not served by public transport. They can be rented for about B$80 to
B$100 per day from moto-taxi stands. Note that many travel insurance
policies will not cover you for injuries arising from motorbike accidents.
Driver’s License
Most Bolivian car-rental agencies will accept your home driver’s license,
but if you’re doing a lot of driving, it’s wise to back it up with an
International Driver’s License.
Bolivia doesn’t require special motorcycle licenses, but neighboring
countries do. All that is normally required for motorcycle and moped
rentals is a passport.
Private Drivers
Hiring a driver can be a more comfortable and efficient alternative to being
squashed in a bus for long periods on bad roads. Alternatively, many people
just want transport- ation to trailheads or base camps, rather than a tour.
Private 4WD service with a driver costs about B$250 to B$300 per hour
for the entire car (four to six people). Private taxi service and/or driver
service costs B$40 to B$80 per hour.
You can hire drivers through car rental com- panies and tour operators.
Private taxi drivers may also be hired.
Rental
Few travelers in Bolivia rent self-driven vehicles. Only the most reputable
agencies ser- vice their vehicles regularly, and insurance purchased from
rental agencies may cover only accidental damage – breakdowns may be
considered the renter’s problem. Check ahead, and make sure your credit
card covers incidentals, like the US$80 Budget charges to clean cars.
You must be aged over 25, have a driver’s license from your home
country and provide a major credit card or cash deposit (typically around
US$1000). You’ll be charged a daily rate and a per-kilometer rate (some
agencies allow some free kilometers). They’ll also want you to leave a copy
of your passport.
To save money, book online or through an aggregator. Weekly rentals
will save you money. Daily rates are about US$50 for cars, while 4WDs
cost US$55 to US$90 per day.
For listings of better-known agencies, see Getting Around sections for
the major cities.
Road Rules
Traffic regulations are similar to those in North America or Europe. Speed
limits are infrequently posted, but in most cases the state of the road would
prevent you from exceeding them anyway. If stopped, you should show
your driver’s license rather than your passport. If your passport is requested,
only show a copy. Bribes are common here.
Bolivians keep to the right. When two cars approach an uncontrolled
intersection from different directions, the driver who honks (or gets there
first) tends to have the right of way if passing straight through – but this can
be somewhat hit and miss. In La Paz, those going uphill have right of way
at an intersection. When two ve- hicles meet on a narrow mountain road,
the downhill one must reverse until there’s room for the other to pass.
Hitchhiking
Thanks to relatively easy access to camiones and a profusion of buses,
hitchhiking isn’t really necessary or popular in Bolivia. Still, it’s not
unknown and drivers of movilidades – coches (cars), camionetas (pickup
trucks), NGO vehicles, gas trucks and other vehicles – are usually happy to
pick up passengers when they have room. Always ask the price, if any,
before climbing aboard, even for short distances. If they do charge, it
should amount to about half the bus fare for the same distance.
Please note that hitchhiking is never entirely safe in any country. If you
decide to hitchhike, you should understand that you are taking a small but
potentially serious risk. Travel in pairs and let someone know where you’re
planning to go.
Local Transportation
Camión
Prior to today’s expansive bus network, camiones (trucks) were often the
only way for travelers to venture off the beaten track. These days, in the
more populated areas you might consider a camión trip more for the novelty
value than necessity; it is how many campesinos (subsistence farmers)
choose to travel.
Camiones generally cost about half of the bus fare. You’ll need time and
a strong constitution, as travel can be excruciatingly slow and rough,
depending on the cargo and number of passengers. A major plus is the raw
experience, including the best views of the countryside.
On any camión trip, especially in the highlands by day or night, be sure
to take plenty of warm clothing as night temperatures can plunge below
freezing and at best they can be chilly.
To get on a camión, wait on the side of the road and flag it down as it
passes.
Micros, Minibuses & Trufis
Micros (half-size buses) are used in larger cities and are Bolivia’s least
expensive form of public transportation. They follow set routes, with the
route numbers or letters usually marked on a placard behind the windshield.
There is also often a description of the route, including the streets taken to
reach the end of the line. They can be hailed anywhere along their route,
though bus stops are starting to pop up in some bigger cities. When you
want to disembark, move toward the front and tell the driver or assistant
where you want them to stop.
Minibuses and trufis (cars, vans or minibuses), also known as colectivos,
are prevalent in larger towns and cities, and follow set routes that are
numbered and described on placards. They are always cheaper than taxis
and nearly as convenient. As with micros, board or alight anywhere along
their route.
Taxis
In cities and towns, taxis are relatively cheap. Few are equipped with
meters, but in most places there are standard per-person fares for short
hauls. In some places, taxis are collective and more like trufis, charging a
set rate per person. However, if three or four people are all headed for the
same place, you may be able to negotiate a reduced rate for the entire
group.
Radio taxis always charge a set rate for up to four people; if you squeeze
in five people, the fare increases by a small margin.
When using taxis, try to have enough change to cover the fare, as drivers
often like to plead a lack of change in the hope that you’ll give them the
benefit of the difference. As a general rule, taxi drivers aren’t tipped, but if
one goes beyond the call of duty, a tip of a couple of bolivianos wouldn’t be
inappropriate.
In larger cities, especially if traveling alone at night, it’s advisable to opt
for a radio taxi, which is booked by phone, instead of hailing one in the
street; ask your hotel or restaurant to call one for you.
Tours
Many organized tours run out of La Paz or towns closest to the attractions
you’re likely to wish to visit. Tours are a convenient way to visit a site when
you are short of time or motivation, and are frequently the easiest way to
visit remote areas. They can also be relatively cheap, depending on the
number of people in your group and the mode of transportation.
Scores of companies offer trekking, mountain-climbing and rainforestadventure packages around Bolivia. For climbing in the Cordilleras,
operators offer customized expeditions and can arrange anything from
guide and transportation right up to equipment, porters and even a cook.
Some also rent trekking equipment.
It’s best to check an agency’s website before making contact and
bookings.
Akapana Tours ( 2-242-0013; www.akapanatours.com; Av Sanchez
Lima 2512, Edificio Melissa, Piso 11D, Sopocachi, La Paz) A German-run
agency offering personalized tours all over Bolivia with a focus on
adventure, culture, trekking and climbing. It specializes in off-the-beatenpath destinations such as Cordi- llera Apolobamba, Cordillera Quimsa Cruz
and Torotoro.
America Tours Offline map Google map ( 2-237-4204; www.americaecotours.com; 16 de Julio 1490 No 9, Prado, La Paz) This warmly
recommended English-speaking agency organizes a wide range of
community-based eco-tourism projects and tours around La Paz and
Bolivia.
Bolivia Millenaria ( 2-241-4753; www.millenariantours.com; Av
Sanchez Lima 2193, Sopocachi, La Paz) This agency manages the Tomarapi
ecolodge in Sajama and offers cultural tours around Bolivia.
Bolivia Specialist Offline map Google map ( 4-643-7389;
www.boliviaspecialist.com; Ortiz 30, Sucre) Tours organized all over
Bolivia as well as in the region around Sucre. If the office in Sucre is
closed, ask at the bar/restaurant Florín (Bolívar 567).
Bolivian Journeys Offline map Google map ( 7-201-4900;
www.bolivianjourneys.org) A specialist in climbing, mountaineering and
trekking, this company does guided climbs to Huay- na Potosí. Equipment
rental is available, with maps and gas for MSR stoves for sale.
Candelaria Tours Offline map Google map ( 4-644-0340;
www.candelariatours.com; Plazuela Cochabamba, Sucre) Reliable agency,
with staff fluent in English, which runs many types of trips. Particularly
recommendable for trips to Tarabuco and Candelaria. It also has
participatory programs where visitors can work in indigenous communities, especially with textiles.
Forest Tours ( 3-337-2042; www.forestbolivia.com; Junín & 21 de
Mayo, Galería Casco Viejo, Office 115, Santa Cruz) English- speaking and
extremely helpful, offering tours in the Santa Cruz region and elsewhere,
including Samaipata, the Che Trail and Parque Nacional Amboró.
Fremen Tours Offline map Google map ( 2-244-0242; www.andesamazonia.com; cnr Av 6 de Agosto & Perez, Edificio V Centenario, Oficina
6-C, La Paz) Upmarket agency specializing in soft adventure in the
Amazon and Chapare; there are also offices in Cochabamba ( 4-425-
9392; Tumusla N-245) and Uyuni ( 2-693-3543; Sucre 325).
Inca Land Tours ( 2-231-6760; www.incalandtours.com; Sagárnaga 233
No 3, La Paz) An established Peruvian budget operation specializing in
tours out of Rurrenabaque and Coroico.
Madidi Travel Offline map Google map ( 2-231-8313; www.madiditravel.com; Linares 968, Rosario, La Paz) Specializing in trips to Madidi,
this tour operator’s 4000-hectare private reserve within the park adds
another layer of protection.
Magri Turismo Offline map Google map ( 2-244-2727;
www.magriturismo.com; Capitán Ravelo 2101, Prado, La Paz) A range of
tours organized around Bolivia.
Topas Bolivia ( 2-211-1082; www.topas.bo; Carlos Bravo 299, La Paz)
A joint venture between Topas Denmark and Akhamani Trekking, this
English-speaking adventure travel agency is run by experienced people and
offers high-quality tours all over Bolivia, with a special focus on trekking
and climbing.
Turisbus Offline map Google map ( 2-244-1756; www.turisbus.com;
Illampu 704, Hotel Rosario, Rosario, La Paz) A large range of day and
multiday tours organized for groups and individuals around Bolivia.
Train
Passenger rail services have been cut back since privat- ization in the mid1990s. The western network operated by the Empresa Ferroviaria Andina
(FCA; www.fca.com.bo) runs from Oruro to Villazón on the Argentine
border and a branch line runs southwest from Uyuni to Avaroa on the
Chilean border.
The east is operated by Ferroviaria Oriental
(www.ferroviariaoriental.com), which operates a line from Santa Cruz to
the Brazilian frontier at Quijarro, where you cross to the Pantanal. An
infrequently used service goes south from Santa Cruz to Yacuiba on the
Argentine border, and at the time of writing there was a pilot project
running tourist trains from La Paz to Tiwanaku.
Train fares range fron B$32 to B$224, depending on the class and
distance. In terms of price, they are competitive with bus fares.
Reservations
Even in major towns along the routes, tickets can be reserved only on the
day of departure. At smaller stations, they may not be available until the
train has arrived. Larger intermediate stations have only a few seat
reservations, and tickets go on sale literally whenever employees decide to
open up. The best info is usually available from the jefe de la estación
(station master).
When buying tickets, make sure you have a passport for each person for
whom you’re buying a ticket. This is a remnant from the days when ticket
scalping was profitable.
Top of section
Health
BEFORE YOU GO
The only required vaccine for Bolivia is yellow fever, and that’s only if
you’re arriving from a yellow fever–infected country in Africa or the
Americas. However, a number of other vaccines are recommended, such as
hepatitis A, rabies, tetanus/diphtheria and typhoid.
Since most vaccines don’t produce immunity until at least two weeks
after they’re given, visit a physician four to eight weeks before departure.
Ask your doctor for an International Certificate of Vaccination, containing a
list of your vaccinations.
Bring medications in their original containers, clearly labeled, and a
signed, dated letter from your physician describing all medical conditions
and medications. If carrying syringes or needles, carry a physician’s letter
documenting their medical necessity.
Insurance
If your health insurance does not cover you for medical expenses abroad,
consider supplemental insurance. Check the Travel Insurance section of
Lonely Planet’s website (www.lonelyplanet.com/travel-insurance) for more
information. Find out in advance if your insurance plan will make payments
directly to providers or reimburse you later for overseas health
expenditures. Most private- practice providers in Bolivia expect cash
payment and should provide receipts for your insurance company claims
and reimbursement. Credit cards are usually not accepted for medical
services.
MEDICAL CHECKLIST
»antibiotics
»antidiarrheal drugs (eg loperamide)
»acetaminophen (Tylenol) or aspirin
»anti-inflammatory drugs (eg ibuprofen)
»antihistamines (for hay fever and allergic reactions)
»antibacterial ointment (eg Bactroban) for cuts and abrasions
»steroid cream or cortisone (for poison ivy and other allergic rashes)
»bandages, gauze, gauze rolls
»adhesive or paper tape
»scissors, safety pins, tweezers
»thermometer
»pocket knife
»DEET-containing insect repellent for the skin
»permethrin-containing insect spray for clothing, tents and bed nets
»sunscreen
»oral rehydration salts
»iodine tablets (for water purification)
»syringes and sterile needles
»acetazolamide (Diamox) for altitude sickness
IN BOLIVIA
Availability & Cost of Healthcare
Good medical care is available in the larger cities, but may be difficult to
find in rural areas. Many doctors and hospitals expect payment in cash,
regardless of whether you have travel health insurance. See the Information
section of each city or town for recommended emergency and medical
services. Note that a taxi may get you to the emergency room faster than an
ambulance.
If you develop a life- threatening medical problem, you’ll probably want
to be evacuated to a country with state-of-the-art medical care. Since this
may cost tens of thousands of dollars, be sure the insurance covers this
before you depart.
Bolivian pharmacies offer most of the medications available in other
countries. In general it’s safer to buy pharmaceuticals made by international
manufacturers rather than local companies; buy the brand name prescribed
by your doctor, not the generic-brand drugs that may be offered at lower
prices. These medications may be out of date or have no quality control
from the manufacturer.
Infectious Diseases
Cholera
Cholera is an intestinal infection acquired through ingestion of
contaminated food or water. The main symptom is profuse, watery diarrhea,
which may be so severe that it causes life-threatening dehydration. The key
treatment is drinking an oral rehydration solution. Antibiotics are also
given, usually tetracycline or doxycycline, though quinolone antibiotics
such as ciprofloxacin and levofloxacin are also effective.
Cholera sometimes occurs in Bolivia, but it’s rare among travelers. A
cholera vaccine is no longer required. There are effective vaccines, but
they’re not available in many countries and are only recommended for those
at particularly high risk.
Dengue Fever
Dengue fever is a viral infection found throughout South America. Dengue
is transmitted by Aedes mosquitoes, which bite preferentially during the
daytime and are usually found close to human habitations, often indoors.
They breed in artificial water containers, such as jars, barrels, cans, cisterns,
metal drums, plastic containers and discarded tires. As a result, dengue is
especially common in densely populated, urban environments.
Dengue causes flu-like symptoms, including fever, muscle aches, joint
pains, headache, nausea and vomiting, often followed by a rash. The body
aches may be quite uncomfortable, but most cases resolve uneventfully in a
few days. Severe cases usually occur in children under the age of 15 who
are experiencing their second dengue infection.
There is no specific antivirus (antibiotics) treatment for dengue fever
except to take analgesics such as acetaminophen/paracetamol (Tylenol) and
drink plenty of fluids. Severe cases may require hospitalization for
intravenous fluids and supportive care. There is no vaccine. The
cornerstone of prevention is insect protection ( Click here ).
Hepatitis A
Hepatitis A is the second most common travel-related infection (after
travelers’ diarrhea). It’s a viral infection of the liver that is usually acquired
by ingestion of contaminated water, food or ice, or by direct contact with
infected persons. The illness occurs throughout the world, but the incidence
is higher in developing nations. Symptoms may include fever, malaise,
jaundice, nausea, vomiting and abdominal pain. Most cases resolve without
complications, though hepatitis A occasionally causes severe liver damage.
There is no treatment.
Malaria
Malaria occurs in nearly every South American country. It’s transmitted by
mosquito bites, usually between dusk and dawn. The main symptom is high
spiking fever, which may be accompanied by chills, sweats, headache, body
aches, weakness, vomiting or diarrhea. Severe cases may affect the central
nervous system and lead to seizures, confusion, coma and death.
Taking malaria pills is strongly recommended for areas below 2500m
(8202 ft) in the departments of Beni, Santa Cruz and Pando, where the risk
is highest. Falciparum malaria, which is the most dangerous kind, occurs in
Beni and Pando. No malaria is currently present in the cities of these
departments.
There is a choice of three malaria pills, all of which work about equally
well. Mefloquine (Lariam) is taken once weekly in a dosage of 250mg,
starting one to two weeks before arrival, and continuing through the trip and
for four weeks after return. The problem is that a certain percentage of
people (the number is controversial) develop neuropsychiatric side effects,
which may range from mild to severe. Stomachache and diarrhea are also
common. Atovaquone/proguanil (Malarone) is taken once daily with food,
starting two days before arrival and continuing daily until seven days after
departure. Side effects are typically mild. Doxycycline is relatively
inexpensive and easy to obtain, but it is taken daily and can cause an
exaggerated sunburn reaction.
For longer trips it’s probably worth trying mefloquine; for shorter trips,
Malarone will be the drug of choice for most people.
Protecting yourself against mosquito bites is just as important as taking
malaria pills, since none of the pills are 100% effective.
If you may not have access to medical care while traveling, you should
bring along additional pills for emergency self-treatment, which you should
take if you can’t reach a doctor and you develop symptoms that suggest
malaria, such as high spiking fevers. One option is to take four tablets of
Malarone once daily for three days. However, Malarone should not be used
for treatment if you’re already taking it for prevention. An alternative is to
take 650mg quinine three times daily and 100mg doxycycline twice daily
for one week. If you start self-medication, see a doctor at the earliest
possible opportunity.
If you develop a fever after returning home, see a physician, as malaria
symptoms may not occur for months.
Typhoid Fever
Typhoid fever is caused by the ingestion of food or water contaminated by a
species of salmonella known as salmonella typhi. Fever occurs in virtually
all cases. Other symptoms may include headache, malaise, muscle aches,
dizziness, loss of appetite, nausea and abdominal pain. Either diarrhea or
constipation may occur. Possible complications include intestinal
perforation, intestinal bleeding, confusion, delirium or (rarely) coma.
A typhoid vaccine is a good idea. It’s usually given orally, but is also
available as an injection. Neither vaccine is approved for use in children
under the age of two.
It is not a good idea to self-treat for typhoid fever as the symptoms may
be indistinguishable from malaria. If you show symptoms for either, see a
doctor immediately – treatment is likely to be a quinolone antibiotic such as
ciprofloxacin (Cipro) or levofloxacin (Levaquin).
ONLINE RESOURCES
MD Travel Health (www.mdtravelhealth.com)
World Health Organization (www.who.int/ith)
Your government’s travel health website can also be helpful:
Australia (www.smartraveller.gov.au/tips/travelwell.html)
Canada (www.hc-sc.gc.ca/english/index.html)
UK (www.direct.gov.uk/en/TravelAndTransport/index.html)
US (www.cdc.gov/travel)
Yellow Fever
Yellow fever is a life- threatening viral infection transmitted by mosquitoes
in forested areas. The illness begins with flu-like symptoms, such as fever,
chills, headache, muscle aches, backache, loss of appetite, nausea and
vomiting. These symptoms usually subside in a few days, but one person in
six enters a second, toxic phase characterized by recurrent fever, vomiting,
listlessness, jaundice, kidney failure and hemorrhage, leading to death in up
to half of the cases. There is no treatment except for supportive care.
Yellow-fever vaccine is strongly recommended for all those visiting areas
where yellow fever occurs, which at time of publication included the
departments of Beni, Cochabamba, Santa Cruz and La Paz. For the latest
information on which areas in Bolivia are reporting yellow fever, see the
website of Centers for Disease Control & Protection (CDC; www.cdc.gov).
Proof of vaccination is required from all travelers arriving from a yellow
fever–infected country in Africa or the Americas.
Yellow-fever vaccine is given only in approved yellow- fever vaccination
centers, which provide validated International Certificates of Vaccination
(yellow booklets). The vaccine should be given at least 10 days before any
potential exposure to yellow fever, and remains effective for approximately
10 years. Reactions to the vaccine are generally mild and may include
headaches, muscle aches, low-grade fevers, or discomfort at the injection
site. Severe, life-threatening reactions have been described but are
extremely rare. In general, the risk of becoming ill from the vaccine is far
smaller than the risk of becoming ill from yellow fever, and you’re strongly
encouraged to get the vaccine.
Taking measures to protect yourself from mosquito bites is an essential
part of preventing yellow fever.
Other Infections
A number of rare but ser- ious diseases are carried by insects and rodents,
such as bartonellosis, Bolivian hemorrhagic fever, Chagas’ disease,
leishmaniasis, typhus and the plague. Rabies is also a concern, especially in
the southeastern part of the country. Do not attempt to pet, handle or feed
any animal. Any bite or scratch by a mammal, including bats, should be
promptly and thoroughly cleansed with large amounts of soap and water,
followed by application of an antiseptic such as iodine or alcohol. The local
health authorities should be contacted immediately for possible postexposure rabies treatment, whether or not you’ve been immun- ized against
rabies. It may also be advisable to start an antibiotic, since wounds caused
by animal bites and scratches frequently become infected. Or use one of the
newer quinolones, such as levofloxacin (Levaquin), which many travelers
carry in case of diarrhea.
Travelers’ Diarrhea
To prevent diarrhea, avoid tap water unless it has been boiled, filtered or
chem- ically disinfected (with iodine tablets); only eat fresh fruits or
vegetables if peeled or cooked; be wary of dairy products that might contain
unpasteurized milk; and be highly selective when eating food from street
vendors.
If you develop diarrhea, be sure to drink plenty of fluids, preferably an
oral rehydration solution containing lots of salt and sugar. A few loose
stools don’t require treatment but if you start having more than four or five
stools a day, you should start taking an antibiotic (usually a quinolone drug)
and an antidiarrheal agent (such as loperamide). If diarrhea is bloody, or
persists for more than 72 hours, or is accompanied by fever, shaking chills
or severe abdominal pain, you should seek med- ical attention.
Environmental Hazards
Altitude Sickness
Altitude sickness may de- velop in those who ascend rapidly to altitudes
greater than 2500m (8100 ft). In Bolivia this includes La Paz (altitude
4000m). Being physically fit offers no protection. Those who have
experienced altitude sickness in the past are prone to future episodes. The
risk increases with faster ascents, higher altitudes and greater exertion.
Symptoms may include headache, nausea, vomiting, dizziness, malaise,
insomnia and loss of appetite. Severe cases may be complicated by fluid in
the lungs (high-altitude pulmonary edema) or swel- ling of the brain (highaltitude cerebral edema).
The best treatment for altitude sickness is descent. If you are exhibiting
symptoms, do not ascend. If symptoms are severe or persistent, descend
immediately.
To protect yourself against altitude sickness, take 125mg or 250mg
acetazolamide (Diamox) twice or three times daily, starting 24 hours before
ascent and continuing for 48 hours after arrival at altitude. Possible side
effects include increased urinary volume, numbness, tingling, nausea,
drowsiness, myopia and temporary impotence. Acetazolamide should not
be given to pregnant women or anyone with a history of sulfa allergy.
For those who cannot tolerate acetazolamide, the next best option is 4mg
dexamethasone taken four times daily, best with medical supervision.
Unlike acetazolamide, dexamethasone must be tapered gradually on arrival
at altitude if taken for longer than 10 days, since there is a risk that altitude
sickness will occur as the dosage is reduced. Dexamethasone is a steroid, so
it should not be given to diabetics or anyone for whom steroids are contraindicated. A natural alternative is gingko, which helps some people.
When traveling to high altitudes, it’s also important to avoid
overexertion, eat light meals and abstain from alcohol.
If your symptoms are more than mild or don’t resolve promptly, see a
doctor immediately. Altitude sickness should be taken seriously; it can be
life-threatening when severe.
Insect Bites & Stings
To prevent mosquito bites, wear long sleeves, long pants, hats and shoes
(rather than sandals). Bring along a good insect repellent, preferably one
containing DEET, which should be applied to exposed skin and clothing,
but not to eyes, mouth, cuts, wounds or irritated skin. Products containing
lower concentrations of DEET are as effective, but for shorter periods of
time. In general, adults and children over 12 should use preparations
containing 25% to 35% DEET, which usually lasts about six hours.
Children between two and 12 years of age should use preparations
containing no more than 10% DEET, applied sparingly, which will usually
last about three hours. Neurologic toxicity has been reported from DEET,
especially in children, but appears to be extremely uncommon and generally
related to overuse. DEET-containing compounds should not be used on
children under the age of two.
Insect repellents containing certain botanical products, including
eucalyptus oil and soybean oil, are effective but last only 1½ to two hours.
DEET-containing repellents are preferable for areas where there is a high
risk of malaria or yellow fever. Pro- ducts based on citronella are not
effective.
For additional protection you can apply permethrin to clothing, shoes,
tents and bed nets. Permethrin treatments are safe and remain effective for
at least two weeks, even when items are laundered. Permethrin should not
be applied dir- ectly to skin.
Don’t sleep with the window open unless there is a screen. If sleeping
outdoors or in accommodations that allow entry of mosquitoes, use a finemesh bed net, preferably treated with permethrin, with edges tucked in
under the mattress. If the sleeping area is not protected, use a mosquito coil,
which will fill the room with insecticide through the night. Repellentimpregnated wristbands are not effective.
Snake Bites
In Bolivia there are two species of poisonous snakes: pit vipers
(rattlesnakes) and coral snakes. These are found chiefly on the sugar and
banana plantations, and in the dry, hilly regions. In the event of a venomous
snake bite, place the victim at rest, keep the bitten area immobil- ized and
move the victim to the nearest medical facility immediately. Avoid
tourniquets, which are no longer recommended.
Sunburn & Heat Exhaustion
To protect yourself from excessive sun exposure, stay out of the midday
sun, wear sunglasses and a wide-brimmed sun hat, and apply sunscreen
with SPF 15 or higher, with both UVA and UVB protection. Sunscreen
should be generously applied to all exposed parts of the body approximately
30 minutes before sun exposure and should be reapplied after swimming or
vigorous activity. Travelers should also drink plenty of fluids and avoid
strenuous exercise in high temperatures.
Water
Tap water in Bolivia is not safe to drink. Vigorous boiling for one minute is
the most effective means of water purification. At altitudes greater than
2000m (6500ft), boil for three minutes.
Another option is to disinfect water with iodine pills such as Globaline,
Potable-Aqua and Coghlan’s, available at most pharmacies. Instructions are
enclosed and should be carefully followed. Or you can add 2% tincture of
iodine to one quart or liter of water (five drops to clear water, 10 drops to
cloudy water) and let it stand for 30 minutes. If the water is cold, longer
times may be required. The taste of iodinated water may be improved by
adding vitamin C (ascorbic acid). Iodinated water shouldn’t be consumed
for more than a few weeks. Pregnant women, those with a history of thyroid
disease and those allergic to iodine should not drink iodinated water.
A number of water filters are on the market. Those with smaller pores
(reverse osmosis filters) provide the broadest protection, but they are
relatively large and are readily plugged by debris. Those with larger pores
(microstrainer filters) are ineffective against viruses, although they remove
other organisms. Manufacturers’ instructions must be carefully followed.
Women’s Health
There are English-speaking obstetricians in Bolivia, listed on the US
Embassy website
(http://bolivia.usembassy.gov/uploads/images/eOd9_kCdEz0Za_pollKATw/
PHYS ICIANSLIST1.pdf). However, medical facilities will probably not be
comparable to those in your home country. It’s safer to avoid travel to
Bolivia late in pregnancy, so that you don’t have to deliver there.
If pregnant, you should avoid travel to high altitudes. The lower oxygen
levels that occur at high altitudes can slow fetal growth, especially after the
32nd week. Also, it’s safer not to visit areas where yellow fever occurs,
since the vaccine is not safe during pregnancy.
If you need to take malaria pills, mefloquine (Lariam) is the safest during
pregnancy.